Matplotlib tutorial
Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier.
http://www.loria.fr/ rougier/teaching/matplotlib/matplotlib.html, 2012. ￿cel-00907344￿

Matplotlib

Doctoral.

tutorial.

Matplotlib

tutorial,

HAL Id: cel-00907344

https://cel.hal.science/cel-00907344

Submitted on 21 Nov 2013

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Matplotlib tutorial
Nicolas P. Rougier - Euroscipy 2012 - Prace 2013 -
Euroscipy 2013

Introduction
Simple plot
Figures, Subplots, Axes and Ticks
Other Types of Plots
Beyond this tutorial
Quick references

Note
There is now an accompanying
numpy tutorial.

This tutorial is based on Mike Müller's tutorial available from the scipy
lecture notes.

Sources are available here. Figures are in the ﬁgures directory and all
scripts are located in the scripts directory. Github repository is here

All code and material is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 United States License (CC-by)
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/us

Many thanks to Bill Wing and Christoph Deil for review and
corrections.

Introductory slides on scientiﬁc visualization are here

Introduction

matplotlib is probably the single most used Python package for 2D-
graphics. It provides both a very quick way to visualize data from
Python and publication-quality ﬁgures in many formats. We are going
to explore matplotlib in interactive mode covering most common
cases.

IPython and the pylab mode

IPython is an enhanced interactive Python shell that has lots of
interesting features including named inputs and outputs, access to shell
commands, improved debugging and many more. When we start it
with the command line argument -pylab (--pylab since IPython version
0.12), it allows interactive matplotlib sessions that have
Matlab/Mathematica-like functionality.

pylab

pylab provides a procedural interface to the matplotlib object-oriented
plotting library. It is modeled closely after Matlab(TM). Therefore, the
majority of plotting commands in pylab have Matlab(TM) analogs with
similar arguments. Important commands are explained with interactive
examples.

Simple plot

In this section, we want to draw the cosine and sine functions on the
same plot. Starting from the default settings, we'll enrich the ﬁgure step
by step to make it nicer.

First step is to get the data for the sine and cosine functions:

from pylab import \*

X = np.linspace(-np.pi, np.pi, 256,endpoint=True)
C,S = np.cos(X), np.sin(X)

X is now a numpy array with 256 values ranging from -π to +π
(included). C is the cosine (256 values) and S is the sine (256 values).

To run the example, you can type them in an IPython interactive
session

$ ipython --pylab
This brings us to the IPython prompt:

IPython 0.13 -- An enhanced Interactive Python.
? -> Introduction to IPython's features.
%magic -> Information about IPython's 'magic' % functions.

help -> Python's own help system.
object? -> Details about 'object'. ?object also works, ?? print
s more.

Welcome to pylab, a matplotlib-based Python environment.
For more information, type 'help(pylab)'.

or you can download each of the examples and run it using regular
python:

$ python exercice\_1.py

You can get source for each step by clicking on the corresponding
ﬁgure.

Using defaults

Documentation

plot tutorial
plot() command

Matplotlib comes with a set of default settings that allow customizing
all kinds of properties. You can control the defaults of almost every
property in matplotlib: ﬁgure size and dpi, line width, color and style,
axes, axis and grid properties, text and font properties and so on.
While matplotlib defaults are rather good in most cases, you may want
to modify some properties for speciﬁc cases.

from pylab import \*

X = np.linspace(-np.pi, np.pi, 256,endpoint=True)
C,S = np.cos(X), np.sin(X)

plot(X,C)
plot(X,S)

show()

Instantiating defaults

Documentation

Customizing matplotlib

In the script below, we've instantiated (and commented) all the ﬁgure
settings that inﬂuence the appearance of the plot. The settings have
been explicitly set to their default values, but now you can
interactively play with the values to explore their affect (see Line
properties and Line styles below).

# Import everything from matplotlib (numpy is accessible via 'n
p' alias)
from pylab import \*

# Create a new figure of size 8x6 points, using 80 dots per inc
h
figure(figsize=(8,6), dpi=80)

# Create a new subplot from a grid of 1x1
subplot(1,1,1)

X = np.linspace(-np.pi, np.pi, 256,endpoint=True)
C,S = np.cos(X), np.sin(X)

# Plot cosine using blue color with a continuous line of width 
1 (pixels)
plot(X, C, color="blue", linewidth=1.0, linestyle="-")

# Plot sine using green color with a continuous line of width 1
 (pixels)
plot(X, S, color="green", linewidth=1.0, linestyle="-")

# Set x limits
xlim(-4.0,4.0)

# Set x ticks
xticks(np.linspace(-4,4,9,endpoint=True))

# Set y limits
ylim(-1.0,1.0)

# Set y ticks

yticks(np.linspace(-1,1,5,endpoint=True))

# Save figure using 72 dots per inch
# savefig("exercice\_2.png",dpi=72)

# Show result on screen
show()

Changing colors and line widths

Documentation
Controlling line properties
Line API

First step, we want to have the cosine in blue and the sine in red and a
slighty thicker line for both of them. We'll also slightly alter the ﬁgure
size to make it more horizontal.

...
figure(figsize=(10,6), dpi=80)
plot(X, C, color="blue", linewidth=2.5, linestyle="-")
plot(X, S, color="red", linewidth=2.5, linestyle="-")
...

Setting limits

Documentation

xlim() command
ylim() command

Current limits of the ﬁgure are a bit too tight and we want to make
some space in order to clearly see all data points.

...
xlim(X.min()\*1.1, X.max()\*1.1)
ylim(C.min()\*1.1, C.max()\*1.1)
...

Setting ticks

Documentation

xticks() command
yticks() command
Tick container
Tick locating and formatting

Current ticks are not ideal because they do not show the interesting
values (+/-π,+/-π/2) for sine and cosine. We'll change them such that
they show only these values.

...
xticks( [-np.pi, -np.pi/2, 0, np.pi/2, np.pi])
yticks([-1, 0, +1])
...

Setting tick labels

Documentation
Working with text
xticks() command

Ticks are now properly placed but their label is not very explicit. We
could guess that 3.142 is π but it would be better to make it explicit.

yticks() command
set\_xticklabels()
set\_yticklabels()

When we set tick values, we can also provide a corresponding label in
the second argument list. Note that we'll use latex to allow for nice
rendering of the label.

...
xticks([-np.pi, -np.pi/2, 0, np.pi/2, np.pi],
 [r'$-\pi$', r'$-\pi/2$', r'$0$', r'$+\pi/2$', r'$+\pi$']
)

yticks([-1, 0, +1],
 [r'$-1$', r'$0$', r'$+1$'])
...

Moving spines

Documentation
Spines
Axis container
Transformations tutorial

Spines are the lines connecting the axis tick marks and noting the
boundaries of the data area. They can be placed at arbitrary positions
and until now, they were on the border of the axis. We'll change that
since we want to have them in the middle. Since there are four of them

(top/bottom/left/right), we'll discard the top and right by setting their
color to none and we'll move the bottom and left ones to coordinate 0
in data space coordinates.

...
ax = gca()
ax.spines['right'].set\_color('none')
ax.spines['top'].set\_color('none')
ax.xaxis.set\_ticks\_position('bottom')
ax.spines['bottom'].set\_position(('data',0))
ax.yaxis.set\_ticks\_position('left')
ax.spines['left'].set\_position(('data',0))
...

Adding a legend

Documentation
Legend guide
legend() command
Legend API

Let's add a legend in the upper left corner. This only requires adding
the keyword argument label (that will be used in the legend box) to the
plot commands.

...
plot(X, C, color="blue", linewidth=2.5, linestyle="-", label="c
osine")
plot(X, S, color="red", linewidth=2.5, linestyle="-", label="s
ine")

legend(loc='upper left')
...

Annotate some points

Documentation

Let's annotate some interesting points using the annotate command.

Annotating axis

annotate() command

We chose the 2π/3 value and we want to annotate both the sine and
the cosine. We'll ﬁrst draw a marker on the curve as well as a straight
dotted line. Then, we'll use the annotate command to display some
text with an arrow.

...

t = 2\*np.pi/3
plot([t,t],[0,np.cos(t)], color ='blue', linewidth=2.5, linesty
le="--")
scatter([t,],[np.cos(t),], 50, color ='blue')

annotate(r'$\sin(\frac{2\pi}{3})=\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}$',
 xy=(t, np.sin(t)), xycoords='data',
 xytext=(+10, +30), textcoords='offset points', fontsiz
e=16,
 arrowprops=dict(arrowstyle="->", connectionstyle="arc3
,rad=.2"))

plot([t,t],[0,np.sin(t)], color ='red', linewidth=2.5, linestyl
e="--")
scatter([t,],[np.sin(t),], 50, color ='red')

annotate(r'$\cos(\frac{2\pi}{3})=-\frac{1}{2}$',
 xy=(t, np.cos(t)), xycoords='data',
 xytext=(-90, -50), textcoords='offset points', fontsiz
e=16,
 arrowprops=dict(arrowstyle="->", connectionstyle="arc3
,rad=.2"))
...

Devil is in the details

Documentation

Artists
BBox

The tick labels are now hardly visible because of the blue and red
lines. We can make them bigger and we can also adjust their
properties such that they'll be rendered on a semi-transparent white
background. This will allow us to see both the data and the labels.

...

f
o
r

l
a
b
e
l

i
n

a
x
.
g
e
t
\_
x
t
icklabels() + ax.get\_yticklabels():
 label.set\_fontsize(16)
 label.set\_bbox(dict(facecolor='white', edgecolor='None', al
pha=0.65 ))
...

Figures, Subplots, Axes and Ticks

So far we have used implicit ﬁgure and axes creation. This is handy for
fast plots. We can have more control over the display using ﬁgure,
subplot, and axes explicitly. A ﬁgure in matplotlib means the whole
window in the user interface. Within this ﬁgure there can be subplots.
While subplot positions the plots in a regular grid, axes allows free
placement within the ﬁgure. Both can be useful depending on your
intention. We've already worked with ﬁgures and subplots without
explicitly calling them. When we call plot, matplotlib calls gca() to get
the current axes and gca in turn calls gcf() to get the current ﬁgure. If
there is none it calls ﬁgure() to make one, strictly speaking, to make a
subplot(111). Let's look at the details.

Figures

A ﬁgure is the windows in the GUI that has "Figure #" as title. Figures
are numbered starting from 1 as opposed to the normal Python way
starting from 0. This is clearly MATLAB-style. There are several
parameters that determine what the ﬁgure looks like:

 
 
 
Argument Default
1
num
ﬁgure.ﬁgsize
ﬁgsize
ﬁgure.dpi
dpi
facecolor
ﬁgure.facecolor
edgecolor ﬁgure.edgecolor

frameon

True

Description
number of ﬁgure
ﬁgure size in in inches (width, height)
resolution in dots per inch
color of the drawing background
color of edge around the drawing
background
draw ﬁgure frame or not

The defaults can be speciﬁed in the resource ﬁle and will be used most
of the time. Only the number of the ﬁgure is frequently changed.

When you work with the GUI you can close a ﬁgure by clicking on the
x in the upper right corner. But you can close a ﬁgure
programmatically by calling close. Depending on the argument it
closes (1) the current ﬁgure (no argument), (2) a speciﬁc ﬁgure (ﬁgure
number or ﬁgure instance as argument), or (3) all ﬁgures (all as
argument).

As with other objects, you can set ﬁgure properties also setp or with
the set\_something methods.

Subplots

With subplot you can arrange plots in a regular grid. You need to
specify the number of rows and columns and the number of the plot.
Note that the gridspec command is a more powerful alternative.

 
 
 
Axes

Axes are very similar to subplots but allow placement of plots at any
location in the ﬁgure. So if we want to put a smaller plot inside a
bigger one we do so with axes.

Ticks

Well formatted ticks are an important part of publishing-ready ﬁgures.
Matplotlib provides a totally conﬁgurable system for ticks. There are
tick locators to specify where ticks should appear and tick formatters to
give ticks the appearance you want. Major and minor ticks can be

 
located and formatted independently from each other. Per default
minor ticks are not shown, i.e. there is only an empty list for them
because it is as NullLocator (see below).

Tick Locators

There are several locators for different kind of requirements:

Class

NullLocator

Description
No ticks.

IndexLocator

Place a tick on every multiple of some base number of points
plotted.

FixedLocator

Tick locations are ﬁxed.

LinearLocator Determine the tick locations.

MultipleLocatorSet a tick on every integer that is multiple of some base.

AutoLocator

Select no more than n intervals at nice locations.

LogLocator

Determine the tick locations for log axes.

All of these locators derive from the base class
matplotlib.ticker.Locator. You can make your own locator deriving
from it. Handling dates as ticks can be especially tricky. Therefore,
matplotlib provides special locators in matplotlib.dates.

Other Types of Plots

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hints
You need to use the ﬁll\_between
command.

Regular Plots

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right
taking care of ﬁlled
areas:

from pylab import 
\*

n = 256
X = np.linspace(-n
p.pi,np.pi,n,endpo
int=True)
Y = np.sin(2\*X)

Hints
Color is given by angle of (X,Y).

plot (X, Y+1, color='blue', alpha=1.00)
plot (X, Y-1, color='blue', alpha=1.00)
show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Scatter Plots

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right
taking care of marker
size, color and
transparency.

from pylab import 
\*

n = 1024
X = np.random.norm
al(0,1,n)
Y = np.random.normal(0,1,n)

scatter(X,Y)
show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Hints
You need to take care of text
alignment.

Bar Plots

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right
by adding labels for
red bars.

from pylab import 
\*

n = 12
X = np.arange(n)
Y1 = (1-X/float(n)
) \* np.random.unif
orm(0.5,1.0,n)
Y2 = (1-X/float(n)) \* np.random.uniform(0.5,1.0,n)

bar(X, +Y1, facecolor='#9999ff', edgecolor='white')
bar(X, -Y2, facecolor='#ff9999', edgecolor='white')

for x,y in zip(X,Y1):
 text(x+0.4, y+0.05, '%.2f' % y, ha='center', va= 'bottom')

Hints
You need to use the clabel

command.

ylim(-1.25,+1.25)
show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Contour Plots

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right
taking care of the
colormap (see
Colormaps below).

from pylab import 
\*

def f(x,y): return
 (1-x/2+x\*\*5+y\*\*3)
\*np.exp(-x\*\*2-y\*\*2)

n = 256
x = np.linspace(-3,3,n)
y = np.linspace(-3,3,n)
X,Y = np.meshgrid(x,y)

contourf(X, Y, f(X,Y), 8, alpha=.75, cmap='jet')

C = contour(X, Y, f(X,Y), 8, colors='black', linewidth=.5)
show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Hints
You need to take care of the
origin of the image in the

imshow command and use a
colorbar

Imshow

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right
taking care of
colormap, image
interpolation and
origin.

from pylab import 
\*

def f(x,y): return
 (1-x/2+x\*\*5+y\*\*3)\*np.exp(-x\*\*2-y\*\*2)

n = 10
x = np.linspace(-3,3,4\*n)
y = np.linspace(-3,3,3\*n)
X,Y = np.meshgrid(x,y)
imshow(f(X,Y)), show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Hints
You need to modify Z.

Pie Charts

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right
taking care of colors
and slices size.

from pylab import 
\*

n = 20
Z = np.random.unif
orm(0,1,n)
pie(Z), show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Hints
You need to draw arrows twice.

Quiver Plots

Starting from the
code above, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right
taking care of colors
and orientations.

from pylab import 
\*

n = 8
X,Y = np.mgrid[0:n
,0:n]
quiver(X,Y), show(
)

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Grids

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right
taking care of line
styles.

from pylab import 
\*

axes = gca()
axes.set\_xlim(0,4)
axes.set\_ylim(0,3)
axes.set\_xticklabe
ls([])
axes.set\_yticklabels([])

show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Multi Plots

Hints

You can use several subplots

with different partition.

Hints
You only need to modify the
axes line

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right.

from pylab import 
\*

subplot(2,2,1)
subplot(2,2,3)
subplot(2,2,4)

show()

Click on ﬁgure for
solution.

Polar Axis

Starting from the
code below, try to
reproduce the
graphic on the right.

from pylab import 
\*

axes([0,0,1,1])

N = 20
theta = np.arange(
0.0, 2\*np.pi, 2\*np
.pi/N)
radii = 10\*np.rand
om.rand(N)
width = np.pi/4\*np.random.rand(N)
bars = bar(theta, radii, width=width, bottom=0.0)

for r,bar in zip(radii, bars):
 bar.set\_facecolor( cm.jet(r/10.))
 bar.set\_alpha(0.5)

show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

3D Plots

Starting from the code below, try to reproduce the graphic on the right.

from pylab import \*

Hints
You need to use contourf

from mpl\_toolkits.
mplot3d import Axe
s3D

fig = figure()
ax = Axes3D(fig)
X = np.arange(-4, 
4, 0.25)
Y = np.arange(-4, 
4, 0.25)
X, Y = np.meshgrid
(X, Y)
R = np.sqrt(X\*\*2 +
 Y\*\*2)
Z = np.sin(R)

ax.plot\_surface(X,
 Y, Z, rstride=1, cstride=1, cmap='hot')

show()

Click on ﬁgure for solution.

Hints
Have a look at the matplotlib

logo.

Text

Try to do the same
from scratch !

Click on ﬁgure for
solution.

Beyond this tutorial

Matplotlib beneﬁts from extensive documentation as well as a large
community of users and developpers. Here are some links of interest:

Tutorials

Pyplot tutorial

Introduction
Controlling line properties
Working with multiple ﬁgures and axes
Working with text

Image tutorial

Startup commands
Importing image data into Numpy arrays
Plotting numpy arrays as images

Text tutorial

Text introduction
Basic text commands
Text properties and layout
Writing mathematical expressions
Text rendering With LaTeX
Annotating text

Artist tutorial

Introduction
Customizing your objects
Object containers
Figure container
Axes container
Axis containers
Tick containers

Path tutorial

Introduction
Bézier example
Compound paths

Transforms tutorial

Introduction
Data coordinates
Axes coordinates
Blended transformations
Using offset transforms to create a shadow effect
The transformation pipeline

Matplotlib documentation

User guide
FAQ

Installation
Usage
How-To
Troubleshooting
Environment Variables

Screenshots

Code documentation

The code is fairly well documented and you can quickly access a
speciﬁc command from within a python session:

>>> from pylab import \*
>>> help(plot)
Help on function plot in module matplotlib.pyplot:

plot(\*args, \*\*kwargs)
 Plot lines and/or markers to the
 :class:`~matplotlib.axes.Axes`. \*args\* is a variable length
 argument, allowing for multiple \*x\*, \*y\* pairs with an
 optional format string. For example, each of the following 
is
 legal::

 plot(x, y) # plot x and y using default line sty
le and color
 plot(x, y, 'bo') # plot x and y using blue circle mark
ers
 plot(y) # plot y using x as index array 0..N-
1
 plot(y, 'r+') # ditto, but with red plusses

 If \*x\* and/or \*y\* is 2-dimensional, then the corresponding c
olumns
 will be plotted.
 ...

Galleries

The matplotlib gallery is also incredibly useful when you search how
to render a given graphic. Each example comes with its source.

A smaller gallery is also available here.

Mailing lists

Finally, there is a user mailing list where you can ask for help and a
developers mailing list that is more technical.

Quick references

Here is a set of tables that show main properties and styles.

Line properties

Property

alpha (or a)

antialiased

color (or c)

linestyle (or ls)

Description

Appearance

alpha
transparency on 0-
1 scale
True or False - use
antialised
rendering
matplotlib color
arg
see Line
properties

linewidth (or lw) ﬂoat, the line

solid\_capstyle

solid\_joinstyle

dash\_capstyle

dash\_joinstyle

marker

width in points
Cap style for solid
lines
Join style for solid
lines
Cap style for
dashes
Join style for
dashes
see Markers

markeredgewidth
(mew)
markeredgecolor
(mec)
markerfacecolor
(mfc)
markersize (ms)

line width around
the marker symbol
edge color if a
marker is used
face color if a
marker is used
size of the marker
in points

 
 
 
Line styles

Symbol Description

Appearance

-

--

-.

:

.

,

o

^

v

<

>

s

+

x

D

d

1

2

3

4

h

H

p

|

\_

solid line

dashed line
dash-dot line
dotted line

points

pixels
circle

triangle up
triangle down

triangle left

triangle right

square

plus

cross

diamond

thin diamond
tripod down

tripod up
tripod left

tripod right
hexagon

rotated hexagon
pentagon

vertical line
horizontal line

Appearance

Markers

Symbol
0
1
2
3
4
5

Description
tick left
tick right
tick up
tick down
caret left
caret right

6

7

o

D

h

H

\_

1

2

3

4

8

p

^

v

<

>

d

,

+

.

s

\*

|

caret up

caret down

circle

diamond
hexagon 1

hexagon 2
horizontal line

tripod down

tripod up

tripod left
tripod right

octagon
pentagon

triangle up

triangle down
triangle left

triangle right
thin diamond
pixel

plus
point

square
star

vertical line

x

cross
r'$\sqrt{2}$'any latex expression

Colormaps

All colormaps can be reversed by appending \_r. For instance, gray\_r is
the reverse of gray.

If you want to know more about colormaps, checks Documenting the
matplotlib colormaps.

Base

Name Appearance

autumn
bone
cool
copper
ﬂag
gray
hot
hsv
jet
pink
prism
spectral
spring
summer
winter

GIST

Name

Appearance

gist\_earth
gist\_gray
gist\_heat
gist\_ncar

gist\_rainbow

gist\_stern

gist\_yarg

Sequential

Name Appearance

BrBG
PiYG
PRGn

PuOr
RdBu
RdGy
RdYlBu
RdYlGn
Spectral

Diverging

Name Appearance
Blues

BuGn
BuPu
GnBu
Greens
Greys
Oranges
OrRd
PuBu
PuBuGn
PuRd
Purples
RdPu

Reds

YlGn
YlGnBu

YlOrBr

YlOrRd

Qualitative

Name Appearance

Accent
Dark2
Paired
Pastel1

Pastel2
Set1
Set2
Set3

Miscellaneous

Appearance

Name
afmhot
binary
brg
bwr
coolwarm
CMRmap
cubehelix
gnuplot
gnuplot2

ocean

rainbow
seismic

terrain

