C++ Crash Course
Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier.
http://www.loria.fr/ rougier/teaching/c++-crash-course/index.html, 2012. ￿cel-00907297￿

C++ Crash Course.

Engineering school.

C++ Crash course,

HAL Id: cel-00907297

https://cel.hal.science/cel-00907297

Submitted on 21 Nov 2013

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

C++ crash course for C programmers

Author: Nicolas P. Rougier
Sources: crash-course.rst

1 Foreword
2 From C to C++

2.1 Input/Output
2.2 New/Delete
2.3 References
2.4 Default parameters
2.5 Namespaces
2.6 Overloading
2.7 Const & inline
2.8 Mixing C and C++
2.9 Exercises

3 Classes

3.1 Constructors
3.2 Destructor
3.3 Access control
3.4 Initialization list
3.5 Operator overloading
3.6 Friends
3.7 Exercices

4 Inheritance

4.1 Basics
4.2 Virtual methods
4.3 Abstract classes
4.4 Multiple inheritance
4.5 Exercices

5 Exceptions

5.1 The Zen of Python
5.2 Catch me if you can
5.3 Creating your own exception
5.4 Standard exceptions
5.5 Exercices

6 Streams

6.1 iostream and ios
6.2 Class input/output
6.3 Working with ﬁles
6.4 Working with strings
6.5 Exercices

7 Templates

7.1 Template parameters
7.2 Template function
7.3 Template class
7.4 Template specialization
7.5 Exercices

8 Standard Template Library

8.1 Containers
8.2 Iterators
8.3 Algorithms
8.4 Exercices

9 External links

1 Foreword

This is an introduction to C++ for C programmers:

If you can't understand the code below, you'd better start with a C tutorial.

#include 

void main (int argc, char \*\*argv)
{
 printf("Hello World!\n");
}

If you don't know what are the stack and the heap, you'd better have a look at some architecture & system introduction.

If you know java, that might help a bit.

If you think python is cool, you're right, but still, this is not the place.

If you never heard about Bjarne Stroustrup, you might be at the right place.

Here is a list of C++ speciﬁc keywords:

asm dynamic\_cast namespace reinterpret\_cast try

bool explicit new static\_cast typeid

catch false operator template typename

class friend private this using

const\_cast inline public throw virtual

delete mutable protected true wchar\_t

2 From C to C++

Even if C++ is slanted toward object-oriented programming (OOP), you can nevertheless use any c++ compiler to compile c code and
beneﬁts from some c++ goodies.

2.1 Input/Output

Prefer the use of  for input/output operations (see stream section for explanation).

#include 

int main (int argc, char \*\*argv)
{
 int i;
 std::cout << "Please enter an integer value: ";
 std::cin >> i;
 std::cout << "The value you entered is " << i << std::endl;
 return 0;
}

2.2 New/Delete

The new and delete keywords are used to allocate and free memory. They are "object-aware" so you'd better use them instead of malloc and
free. In any case, never cross the streams (new/free or malloc/delete).

int \*a = new int;
delete a;

int \*b = new int[5];
delete [] b;

delete does two things: it calls the destructor and it deallocates the memory.

2.3 References

A reference allows to declare an alias to another variable. As long as the aliased variable lives, you can use indifferently the variable or the
alias.

int x;
int& foo = x;

foo = 42;
std::cout << x << std::endl;

References are extremely useful when used with function arguments since it saves the cost of copying parameters into the stack when
calling the function.

2.4 Default parameters

You can specify default values for function parameters. When the function is called with fewer parameters, default values are used.

float foo( float a=0, float b=1, float c=2 )
{return a+b+c;}

cout << foo(1) << endl
 << foo(1,2) << endl
 << foo(1,2,3) << endl;

You should obtain values 4, 5 and 6.

2.5 Namespaces

Namespace allows to group classes, functions and variable under a common scope name that can be referenced elsewhere.

namespace first { int var = 5; }
namespace second { int var = 3; }
cout << first::var << endl << second::var << endl;

You should obtain values 3 and 5. There exists some standard namespace in the standard template library such as std.

2.6 Overloading

Function overloading refers to the possibility of creating multiple functions with the same name as long as they have different parameters
(type and/or number).

float add( float a, float b )
{return a+b;}

int add( int a, int b )
{return a+b;}

It is not legal to overload a function based on the return type (but you can do it anyway)

2.7 Const & inline

Deﬁnes and macros are bad if not used properly as illustrated below

#define SQUARE(x) x\*x

int result = SQUARE(3+3);

For constants, prefer the const notation:

const int two = 2;

For macros, prefer the inline notation:

int inline square(int x)
{
 return x\*x;
}

2.8 Mixing C and C++

#ifdef \_\_cplusplus
extern "C" {
#endif

#include "some-c-code.h"

#ifdef \_\_cplusplus
}
#endif

2.9 Exercises

1. Write a basic makeﬁle for compiling sources

solution: Makeﬁle

2. How would you declare:

A pointer to a char
A constant pointer to a char
A pointer to a constant char

A constant pointer to a constant char
A reference to a char
A reference to a constant char

solution: crash-course-2.1.cc

3. Create a two-dimensional array of integers (size is n x n), ﬁll it with corresponding indices (a[i][j] = i\*n+j), test it and ﬁnally, delete it.

solution: crash-course-2.2.cc

4. Write a function that swap two integers, then two pointers.

solution: crash-course-2.3.cc

5. Is this legal ?

int add( int a, int b ) { return a+b; }

int add( int a, int b, int c=0 ) { return a+b+c; }

solution: crash-course-2.4.cc

6. Write a const correct division function.

solution: crash-course-2.5.cc

7. What's the difference between int const\* p, int\* const p and int const\* const p ?

solution: crash-course-2.6.cc

3 Classes

A class migh be considered as an extended concept of a data structure: instead of holding only data, it can hold both data and functions. An
object is an instantiation of a class. By default, all attributes and functions of a class are private (see below Access control). If you want a
public default behavior, you can use keyword struct instead of keyword class in the declaration.

class Foo {
 int attribute;
 int function( void ) { };
};

struct Bar {
 int attribute;
 int function( void ) { };
};

Foo foo;
foo.attribute = 1; // WRONG

Bar bar;
bar.attribute = 1; // OK

3.1 Constructors

It is possible to specify zero, one or more constructors for the class.

#include 

class Foo {
public:
 Foo( void )
 { std::cout << "Foo constructor 1 called" << std::endl; }
 Foo( int value )
 { std::cout << "Foo constructor 2 called" << std::endl; }
};

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 Foo foo\_1, foo\_2(2);
 return 0;
}

3.2 Destructor

There can be only one destructor per class. It takes no argument and returns nothing.

#include 

class Foo {
public:
 ~Foo( void )
 { std::cout << "Foo destructor called" << std::endl; }
}
int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 Foo foo();
 return 0;
}

Note that you generally never need to explicitly call a destructor.

3.3 Access control

You can have ﬁne control over who is granted access to a class function or attribute by specifying an explicit access policy:

public: Anyone is granted access
protected: Only derived classes are granted access
private: No one but friends are granted access

3.4 Initialization list

Object's member should be initialized using initialization lists

class Foo
{
 int \_value;
public:
 Foo(int value=0) : \_value(value) { };
};

It's cheaper, better and faster.

3.5 Operator overloading

class Foo {
private:
 int \_value;

public:
 Foo( int value ) : \_value(value) { };

 Foo operator+ ( const Foo & other )
 {
 return Foo( \_value+ other.\_value );
 }

 Foo operator\* ( const Foo & other );
 {
 return Foo( \_value \* other.\_value );
 }
}

3.6 Friends

Friends are either functions or other classes that are granted privileged access to a class.

#include 

class Foo {
public:
 friend std::ostream& operator<< ( std::ostream& output,
 Foo const & that )
 {
 return output << that.\_value;
 }
private:
 double \_value;
};

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 Foo foo;
 std::cout << "Foo object: " << foo << std::endl;
 return 0
}

3.7 Exercices

1. Why the following code doesn't compile ?

class Foo { Foo () { }; };

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 Foo foo;
}

solution: crash-course-3.1.cc

2. Write a Foo class with default and copy constructors and add also an assignment operator. Write some code to highlight the use of each

of them.

solution: crash-course-3.2.cc

3. Write a Point class that can be constructed using cartesian or polar coordinates.

solution: crash-course-3.3.cc

4. Write a Foo class and provide it with an input method.

solution: crash-course-3.4.cc

5. Is is possible to write something like foo.method1().method2() ?

solution: crash-course-3.5.cc

4 Inheritance

4.1 Basics

Inheritance is done at the class deﬁnition level by specifying the base class and the type of inheritance.

class Foo { /\* ... \*/ };
class Bar\_public : public Foo { /\* ... \*/ };
class Bar\_private : private Foo { /\* ... \*/ };
class Bar\_protected : protected Foo { /\* ... \*/ };

Bar\_public, Bar\_private and Bar\_protected are derived from Foo. Foo is the base class of Bar\_public, Bar\_private and Bar\_protected.

In Bar\_public, public parts of Foo are public, protected parts of Foo are protected
In Bar\_private, public and protected parts of Foo are private
In Bar\_protected, public and protected parts of Foo are protected

4.2 Virtual methods

A virtual function allows derived classes to replace the implementation provided by the base class (yes, it is not automatic...). Non virtual
methods are resolved statically (at compile time) while virtual methods are resolved dynamically (at run time).

class Foo {
public:
 Foo( void );
 void method1( void );
 virtual void method2( void );
};

class Bar : public Foo {
public:
 Bar( void );
 void method1( void );
 void method2( void );
};

Foo \*bar = new Bar();
bar->method1();
bar->method2();

Make sure your destructor is virtual when you have derived class.

4.3 Abstract classes

You can deﬁne pure virtual method that prohibits the base object to be instantiated. Derived classes need then to implement the virtual
method.

class Foo {
public:
 Foo( void );
 virtual void method( void ) = 0;
};

class Bar: public Foo {
public:
 Foo( void );
 void method( void ) { };
};

4.4 Multiple inheritance

A class may inherit from multiple base classes but you have to be careful:

class Foo { protected: int data; };
class Bar1 : public Foo { /\* ... \*/ };
class Bar2 : public Foo { /\* ... \*/ };
class Bar3 : public Bar1, public Bar2 {
 void method( void )
 {
 data = 1; // !!! BAD
 }
};

In class Bar3, the data reference is ambiguous since it could refer to Bar1::data or Bar2::data. This problem is referred as the diamond
problem. You can eliminete the problem by explicitely specifying the data origin (e.g. Bar1::data) or by using virtual inheritance in Bar1 and
Bar2.

4.5 Exercices

1. Write a Bar class that inherits from a Foo class and makes constructor and destructor methods to print something when called.

solution: crash-course-4.1.cc

2. Write a foo function and make it called from a class that has a foo method.

solution: crash-course-4.2.cc

3. Write a Real base class and a derived Integer class with all common operators (+,-,\*,/)

solution: crash-course-4.3.cc

4. Write a Singleton class such that only one object of this class can be created.

solution: crash-course-4.4.cc

5. Write a functor class

solution: crash-course-4.5.cc

5 Exceptions

5.1 The Zen of Python

(by Tim Peters)

Beautiful is better than ugly.
Explicit is better than implicit.
Simple is better than complex.
Complex is better than complicated.
Flat is better than nested.
Sparse is better than dense.
Readability counts.
Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
Although practicality beats purity.
Errors should never pass silently.
Unless explicitly silenced.
In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.
Although that way may not be obvious at ﬁrst unless you're Dutch.
Now is better than never.

Although never is often better than right now.
If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!

5.2 Catch me if you can

You can catch any exception using the following structure:

try
{
 float \*array = new float[-1];
}
catch( std::bad\_alloc e )
{
 std::cerr << e.what() << std::endl;
}

If the raised exception is different from the ones you're catching, program will stop.

5.3 Creating your own exception

Creating a new exception is quite easy:

#include 

class Exception : public std::runtime\_error
{
public:
 Exception() : std::runtime\_error("Exception") { };
};

5.4 Standard exceptions

There exist some standard exceptions that can be raised in some circumstances:

#include 

bad\_alloc
bad\_cast
bad\_exception
bad\_typeid
logic\_error

domain\_error
invalid\_argument
length\_error
out\_of\_range

runtime\_error

range\_error
overﬂow\_error
underﬂow\_error

5.5 Exercices

1. How to handle a constructor that fails ?

solution: crash-course-5.1.cc

2. Write a program that raise 3 of the standard exceptions.

solution: crash-course-5.2.cc

3. Write a correct division function.

solution: crash-course-5.3.cc

4. Write a Integer (positive) class with proper exception handling (Overflow, Underflow, DivideByZero, etc.)

solution: crash-course-5.4.cc

6 Streams

C++ provides input/output capability throught the iostream classes that provide the stream concept (iXXXstream for input and oXXXstream
for output).

6.1 iostream and ios

Screen outputs and keyboard inputs may be handled using the iostream header ﬁle:

#include 

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{

 unsigned char age = 65;
 std::cout << static\_cast(age) << std::endl;
 std::cout << static\_cast(&age) << std::endl;

 double f = 3.14159;
 cout.unsetf(ios::floatfield);
 cout.precision(5);
 cout << f << endl;
 cout.precision(10);
 cout << f << endl;
 cout.setf(ios::fixed,ios::floatfield);
 cout << f << endl;

 std::cout << "Enter a number, or -1 to quit: ";
 int i = 0;
 while( std::cin >> i )
 {
 if (i == -1) break;
 std::cout << "You entered " << i << '\n';
 }
 return 0;
}

6.2 Class input/output

You can implement a class input and output using friends functions:

#include 

class Foo {
public:
 friend std::ostream& operator<< ( std::ostream & output, Foo const & that )
 { return output << that.\_value; }
 friend std::istream& operator>> ( std::istream & input, Foo& foo )
 { return input >> fred.\_value; }

private:
 double \_value;
};

6.3 Working with ﬁles

#include 

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 std::ifstream input( filename );
 // std::ifstream input( filename, std::ios::in | std::ios::binary);

 std::ofstream output( filename );
 // std::ofstream output( filename, std::ios::out | std::ios::binary);

 return 0;
}

6.4 Working with strings

#include 

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 const char \*svalue = "42.0";
 int ivalue;
 std::istringstream istream;
 std::ostringstream ostream;

 istream.str(svalue);
 istream >> ivalue;
 std::cout << svalue << " = " << ivalue << std::endl;

 ostream.clear();
 ostream << ivalue;
 std::cout << ivalue << " = " << ostream.str() << std::endl;

 return 0;
}

6.5 Exercices

1. Write an itoa and an atoi function
2. Write a foo class with some attributes and write functions for writing to ﬁle and reading from ﬁle.

7 Templates

Templates are special operators that specify that a class or a function is written for one or several generic types that are not yet known. The
format for declaring function templates is:

template  function\_declaration;
template  class\_declaration;

You can have several templates and to actually use a class or function template, you have to specify all unknown types:

template
T1 foo1( void ) { /\* ... \*/ };

template
T1 foo2( void ) { /\* ... \*/ };

template
class Foo3 { /\* ... \*/ };

int a = foo1();
float b = foo2();
Foo c;

7.1 Template parameters

There are three possible template types:

Type

Non-type

Template

template T foo( void ) { /\* ... \*/ };

template foo( void ) { /\* ... \*/ };

template< template  > foo( void ) { /\* ... \*/ };

7.2 Template function

template 
T max( T a, T b)
{
 return( a > b ? a : b );
}

#include 

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 std::cout << max( 2.2, 2.5 ) << std::endl;
 std::cout << max( 2.2, 2.5 ) << std::endl;
}

7.3 Template class

template 
class Foo {
 T \_value;

public:
 Foo( T value ) : \_value(value) { };
}

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 Foo foo\_int;
 Foo foo\_float;
}

7.4 Template specialization

#include 

template 
class Foo {
 T \_value;
public:
 Foo( T value ) : \_value(value)
 {
 std::cout << "Generic constructor called" << std::endl;
 };
}

template <>
class Foo {
 float \_value;
public:
 Foo( float value ) : \_value(value)
 {
 std::cout << "Specialized constructor called" << std::endl;
 };
}

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 Foo foo\_int;
 Foo foo\_float;
}

7.5 Exercices

1. Write a generic swap function
2. Write a generic point structure
3. Write templated factorial, power and exponential functions (exp(x) = sum\_n x^n/n!, exp(-x) = 1/exp(x))
4. Write a smart pointer class

8 Standard Template Library

8.1 Containers

STL containers are template classes that implement various ways of storing elements and accessing them.

Sequence containers:

vector
deque
list

Container adaptors:

stack
queue
priority\_queue

Associative containers:

set
multiset
map
multimap
bitset

See http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/stl/ for more information.

#include 
#include 
#include 

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 std::vector v;
 v.push\_back(1);
 v.push\_back(2);
 v.push\_back(3);

 std::map m;
 m["one"] = 1;
 m["two"] = 2;
 m["three"] = 3;

 return 0;
}

8.2 Iterators

Iterators are a convebient tool to iterate over a container:

#include 
#include 
#include 

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 std::map m;
 m["one"] = 1;
 m["two"] = 2;
 m["three"] = 3;

 std::map::iterator iter;
 for( iter=m.begin(); iter != m.end(); ++iter )
 {
 std::cout << "map[" << iter->first << "] = "
 << iter->second << std::endl;
 }
 return 0;
}

8.3 Algorithms

Algorithms from the STL offer fast, robust, tested and maintained code for a lot of standard operations on ranged elements. Don't reinvent the
wheel !

Have a look at http://r0d.developpez.com/articles/algos-stl-fr/ (French) and http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/algorithm/ for an overview.

#include 
#include 

bool compare( const int & first, const int & second )
{
 return (first < second);
}

int main( int argc, char \*\*argv )
{
 std::vector v(10);
 std::sort(v.begin(), v.end(), &compare);

 return 0;
}

8.4 Exercices

1. Write a template stack class using the STL vector class
2. Write a generic vector class with iterators and benchmark it againt the STL vector class

9 External links

C++ FAQ — Frequently Asked Questions
http://www.parashift.com/c++-faq-lite/
Boost free peer-reviewed portable C++ source libraries
http://www.boost.org/
Bjarne Stroustrup homepage
http://www2.research.att.com/~bs/
Complete reference on C++ Standard Library
http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp

C++11 main features
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B11
The deﬁnitive C++ book guide
http://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/388242/the-deﬁnitive-c-book-guide-and-list
comp.lang.c++
http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.c++/topics
GNU make
http://www.gnu.org/s/make/manual/make.html
Les meilleurs cours et tutoriaux (in French as you may have already guessed...)
http://cpp.developpez.com/cours/

