Setting A Behavioral Task For Assessing Decision Making In Urodele
Amphibian Charlotte Héricé, Manon Bonnet-Save, André Garenne, Jean-Marie

Cabelguen, Thomas Boraud

To cite this version:

Charlotte Héricé, Manon Bonnet-Save, André Garenne, Jean-Marie
Cabelguen, Thomas Boraud. Set- ting A Behavioral Task For Assessing
Decision Making In Urodele Amphibian. Fifth Symposium on Biology of
Decision-Making (SBDM 2015), May 2015, Paris, France. . ￿hal-01206505￿

HAL Id: hal-01206505

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01206505

Submitted on 29 Sep 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Setting A Behavioral Task For Assessing Decision Making In Urodele
Amphibian 1,3,4, Charlotte HÉRICÉ

1,3,4, Manon BONNET-SAVE

1,2,4, André GARENNE

Jean-Marie CABELGUEN

2,4, Thomas BORAUD

1,2,4

INTRODUCTION Decision making implies cortical-basal ganglia (BG) loops,
but the respective roles of each structure are still debated. Urodeles,
by their similitude with mammals in BG organisation, offer a much less
level of complexity in understanding this process by the presence of
fewer neurons. Therefore, we decided to set up a behavioral test of
decision making in this animal. Moreover, their regenerative capacities
make them a unique model to study post-lesional plasticity of this
process networks. To our knowledge, urodele is the earliest group of
limbed vertebrates in which decision-making has been successfully
addressed yet.

BEHAVIORAL TEST Animals have been trained in associating a polar- ized
light direction to the position of an obscure shelter [1]. Then they
were tested according to the feature of the light (non polarized light,
NPL; po- larized light, PL). Note that the direction of the po-
larization and the N-S direction of the magnetic ﬁeld were
perpendicularly oriented, both during training and test.

Training tank. Animals were housed under a 12h:12h polarized light:dark
cycle and trained 4 times a day dur- ing 3 weeks.

ANIMALS All the experiments were performed on fully metamorphosed
amphibian urodeles (Pleurodeles waltlii) (13 months post-hatching). We
used 20 animals for the behavioral test and 7 for the DA system lesion
(preliminary results obtained for 2 out 7 animals are reported).

DOPAMINERGIC SYSTEM LESION

The animals were deeply anaesthetised via immersion in a 0.1% aqueous
solution of tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222). The micro-pipette con-
taining a 6-OHDA solution was inserted into the brain through a small
hole surgically drilled at the junction of the parietal and frontal
bones in the cranial midline.

Injection site [3]. The red dot indicates the 6-OHDA injection site,
directly into the third ventricle at the level of
diencephalic/mesencephalic dopaminergic (DA) neurons.

Identiﬁcation of DA neurons : Immunohistochemi- cal identiﬁcation.OT:
Optic Tectum. DA-Mb: DA cells groups of the midbrain. Antibodies raised
against tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). The study will be focused on the ven-
tral diencephalic/mesencephalic TH+ cells, which are con- sistently
affected by 6-OHDA administration in the third ventricle.

Test arena. Testing sessions occurred once a day and by 3 tries for each
tested condition.

The number of successive steps during each walking episode (A) and the
step duration (C) were mesured for each animal before, 7 days and 10 or
13 days after the 6-OHDA injection. A similar quantiﬁcation was
performed for swimming cycles (B, D).

Results ﬁeld reresentation. Polarized light vector (blue arrow) and
terrestrial magnetic orientation (red arrow).

Angle occurrence probability. Following training, the number of animals
in the success zone is increased, showing that training is effective.

REFERENCES

The effect of 6-OHDA. The 6-OHDA lesion induced clear short-term effects
on the walking behavior. By

contrast, the swimming behavior seemed unaffected.

FUTURE DIRECTION

This paradigm gives us access to a motor decision making mode. In a
second step, we will perform selective electrical lesions of the pallium
(i.e. the cortex in lower vertebrates), the thalamus and the basal
ganglia to determine the respective role of each structure. We will then
study implication of dopamine in this behavioral task by 6-OHDA lesions.

INSTITUTES 1 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, CNRS UMR 5293,
Bordeaux, France 2 Institut François Magendie, INSERM U862, Bordeaux,
France 3 Équipe Mnémosyne INRIA, Talence, France 4 Université de
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France

SOURCES

Video recordings are available by ﬂashing the QR-code. Mail contact:
charlotte.herice@u-bordeaux.fr

[1] Taylor & al. Spatial Orientation by Salamanders Using
Plane-Polarized Light, 2007 In Science, 181, 285-287 [2] Retailleau &
al. Why am I lost without dopamine? Effects of 6-OHDA lesion on the
encoding of reward and decision process in CA3, 2013 In Neurobiology of
Disease, 59,151–164 [3] Parish & al. Midbrain dopaminergic neurogenesis
and behavioural recovery in a salamander lesion-induced regeneration
model, 2007 In Development and Disease, 134, 2881-2887 [4] Nieuwenhuys &
al. The central nervous system of vertebrates, 1998 In Edition Springer,
Volume 2, chapter 18


