Proceedings of the ANR #CreaMaker workshop:
co-creativity, robotics and maker education.
Laura Cassone, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville, Cindy De Smet,

Mbemba Ndiaye

To cite this version:

Laura Cassone, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville, Cindy De Smet, Mbemba Ndiaye (Dir.). Pro-
ceedings of the ANR #CreaMaker workshop: co-creativity, robotics and maker education.. 2019.
￿hal-02362121￿

HAL Id: hal-02362121

https://hal.science/hal-02362121

Submitted on 19 Dec 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

 Organized in collaboration with the Centre d’Accompagnement Pédagogique (CAP).  

#CreaMaker

ANR 
robotics and maker education  
Proceedings  

 workshop: co-creativity, 

Workshop full program : ​https://goo.gl/tVzztn  

April 1st and 2nd. ​International workshop  

3 avril. ​Séminaire de recherche “Co-créativité et numérique” 

Edited by Laura Cassone, Margarida Romero, Thierry Vieville, Cindy De Smet, Mbemba 

Ndiaye   

Proceedings URL: ​https://bit.ly/2GlWSfp  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
Addressing the global challenges through a (co)creative 

citizenship  

We’re living exciting but also challenging times at the worldwide level. From one side, there are

environmental challenges that can compromise our future as humanity and the socio economic

tensions generated in a context of mass consumption within a model of fossil and nuclear energy

which endangers a sustainable development. From the other side, we have a growing number of

citizen-based initiatives aiming to improve the society and the technological

infrastructures

making possible to cooperate at large scale and not only at a small-group level. Younger

becomes empowered for their future.

In their initiatives such #FridaysForFuture they are no

longer (interactive) media consumers but move forward as creative activists to make older

generations change the system in order to save the planet. At the same time, we have observed

in the last years the emergence of a wide diversity of third places (makerspace, fablab, living

lab…) aiming to empower communities to design and develop their own creative solutions. In this

context, maker-based projects have the potential

to integrate tinkering, programming and

educational robotics to engage the learner in the development of creativity both in individual and

collaborative contexts (Kamga, Romero, Komis, & Mirsili, 2016).

In this context,

the ANR

#CreaMaker project aims to analyse the development of creativity in the context of team-based

maker activities combining tinkering and digital fabrication (Barma, Romero, & Deslandes, 2017;

Fleming, 2015). This first workshop of the ANR #CreaMaker project aims to raise the question on

the concept, activities and assessment of creativity in the context of maker education and its

different approaches : computational

thinking (Class’Code, AIDE), collective innovation

(Invent@UCA), game design (Creative Cultures), problem solving (CreaCube), child-robot

interactions and sustainable development activities. Researchers from Canada, Brazil, Mexico,

Germany, Italy and Spain will reunite with LINE researchers and the MSc SmartEdTech students in

order to advance in how we can design, orchestrate and evaluate co-creativity in technology

enhanced learning (TEL) contexts, and more specifically, in maker based education.  

Margarida Romero 

Laboratoire d’Innovation et Numérique pour l’Education (LINE) director, Université Côte d’Azur. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of contents 

Addressing the global challenges through a (co)creative citizenship

Table of contents

Co-creativity assessment

Abstract

References

Co-creativity through Invent@UCA

Abstract

A focus on DEMOLA

A focus on OASIS (Open source Actions for Societal ImpactS)

Developing (Co)creativity in maker education

Child-robot interaction in unstructured settings

Abstract

References

Creative Cultures : how co-creativity is nurtured in the context of game design

Computational Thinking with CS unplugged

Abstract

What is computational thinking?

Crabs & Turtles - a board game series for fostering computational thinking

References

Co-creativity and computational thinking, the language issue

Developing Creativity and unplugged

Computational Thinking by using COMICS

Abstract

References

Coherence through co-creativity? Task-based tele-collaborations in binational teacher 
education

Abstract

MakerEd for Historical thinking

1 

2 

4 

4 

5 

6 

6 

7 

7 

8 

11 

11 

12 

13 

15 

15 

15 

16 

17 

18 

20 

20 

20 

21 

23 

23 

26 

2 

 
 
 
 
Co-creativity in maker-based education in Collège Beaubois (Montréal)

30 

Literature review on creativity in education journals selected by the French National Board of 
Universities in education sciences

33 

AI in Education: from books to robots

Problem-solving in educational robotics

Kids with Developmental Coordination Disorder playing with robotic cubes

TRANSFORM - a bottom-up teacher development through constructive alignment and 
collaborative teacher learning

35 

38 

41 

43 

Ecologie, pensée complexe et résolution de problèmes: le cas des projets de co-création de 
potagers pédagogiques

45 

Co-créativité en essaimage massif : le cas Idéaton.

Co-creativité dans la démarche créative du CurriqVideo

Activités d’apprentissage en éducation supérieure selon le modèle ICAP

Construire pour écrire: la manipulation au service de la rédaction 

Littératie numérique et co-créativité

47 

49 

52 

53 

5

6 

3 

 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-creativity assessment 

Romero, De Smet, David, Tali 

 is research director of the Laboratoire d’Innovation et Numérique pour 

Margarida Romero
l’Éducation (LINE), a research lab in the field of Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL). Full 
professor at Université Côte d'Azur (France) and associate professor at Université Laval 
(Canada). Her research is oriented towards the inclusive, humanistic and creative uses of 
technologies (co-design, game design and robotics) for the development of creativity, problem 
solving, collaboration and computational thinking. 
https://twitter.com/margaridaromero 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Margarida\_ROMERO   

Margarida.Romero@unice.fr   

 is an assistant professor (Maître de conférences, CNU 70) at the Université Côte 
Cindy De Smet
d'Azur (France). She is responsible for the "creativity" research line within the LINE "Laboratoire 
d'Innovation et du Numérique pour l'Education" research lab. De Smet began her career as a 
researcher and teacher trainer (2004) at the Ghent University College in Flanders (Belgium), and 
defended her PhD in 2015 at Ghent University (Belgium). Her main expertise lies in the fields of 
Game-Based Learning, Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL), the usage of 
technologies in secondary education and the design of learning materials. 
https://twitter.com/drsmetty 

Cindy.De-Smet@univ-cotedazur.fr  

 is a research collaborator at the"Laboratoire d'Innovation et du Numérique pour 

Dayle David
l'Education" (LINE) in the framework of the CréaCube and #CreaMaker project. She is 
completing a master's degree in research in social psychology by working about feeling control, 
mind attribution and social robotics while combining participatory research interventions within 
the framework of the LINE. 

https://dayledavid.com  

Dayle.David@etu.univ-cotedazur.fr  

 is an assistant professor (Maître de conférences, CNU 70) at the Université Côte 

Fatiha Tali
d'Azur (France). Her researchs are based on Apprenticeship Assessment: Competency-Based 
Approach with the LINE "Laboratoire d'Innovation et du Numérique pour l'Education" research 
lab. Her research focuses on teacher training and the use of digital tools for training, teachers' 
professional learning in new hybrid training contexts, incl. instructional and distance 
learning. In addition, at L'École Supérieure du Professorat et de l'Éducation Académie de Nice 
(L’ESPE), she is involved in the training of primary and secondary school teachers. The fields of 
her work are the adaptation and schooling of students with disabilities as well as digital 
education. 

Fatiha.Tali@univ-cotedazur.fr  

Abstract 

Creativity is often associated to representations of individual productions in the artistic fields.

From a research perspective, creativity in learning contexts has mainly been evaluated focusing

4 

 
 
 
 
 
​
 
​
 
​
 
​
 
 
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on individual activities. We consider creativity as a level of cognitive engagement leading to

create a valuable and novel process or solution for a given context or problem. In the context of

creative activities, we consider co-creativity as the collaborative process in which learners are

committed to develop a creative solution. To evaluate this process, we designed and developed

a co-creativity scale (CoCreat), based on the literature review of

the different creativity

components carried out

in collaborative learning contexts. Further on, we describe the

development process of the CoCreat scale and each of its items. Next, we will present the results

of the validation process of the CoCreat scale. The reliability and validity of this scale were

verified on a sample of 421 French-speaking students. Factor analysis shows that theof the

CoCreat scale consists confirm the structure based on of three factors with a satisfactory internal

consistency. This scale aims to be an instrument that can analyze the creativity process in a

collaborative learning setting in both secondary and post-secondary education. 

References 

Hämäläinen, R., & Vähäsantanen, K. (2011). Theoretical and pedagogical perspectives on orchestrating

creativity and collaborative learning.

, 6(3), 169-184. 
 Educational Research Review
​

Romero, M., Arnab, S., De Smet, C., Mohamad, F., Abdelouma, S., Minoi, J. L., & Morini, L. (2018, October).

. In European Conference on Games Based
Co-Creativity Assessment in the Process of Game Creation
​

Learning (pp. 549-XXI). Academic Conferences International Limited. 

Romero, M., Hyvönen, P., & Barberà, E. (2012). Creativity in collaborative learning across the life span.

, 3(4), 422. 
Creative Education
​

Romero, M., & Lille, B.

(2017, July).

Intergenerational techno-creative activities in a library fablab.

In

International 

 (pp. 526-536). Springer, Cham. 
Conference on Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population
​

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
Co-creativity through Invent@UCA   

Ciussi, Guerci, Karrach 

is doctor in Education Sciences, professor of Creativity and Innovation at SKEMA 

Melanie Ciussi 
Business School. She is also responsible for Innovative Teaching and Learning projects for SKEMA 
KCenter and University Cote d’Azur (UCA). She is the co-director of disruptive programmes such 
as Programme ID on social innovations, as well as INVENT@UCA on entrepreneurship & 
innovation. 

Melanie.Ciussi@skema.edu 

 is director of the CPA, which centers on research, teachers and students. Associate 

Eric Guerci
Professor of Economy UCA, Physicist, PhD in Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, at 
present researcher on computational economics and behavioral economics, and innovation. 
co-directs the Invent @ UCA disruptive program 
Côte d'Azur center. 

on entrepreneurship & innovation

He 

 and the Demola 

Eric.Guerci@unice.fr 

 is 

specialist in management of organizations and management of transversal and 

Samira Karrach
complex academic projects. She co-directs the Invent @ UCA co-creation program and the Demola 
Côte d'Azur center. She also directs the Creative Writing Chair at the Storytelling Institute. Finally 
she is Director Higher Education Research and Innovation for the Nice Côte d'Azur Metropolis. 

Samira.Karrach@univ-cotedazur.fr  

Abstract 

INVENT@UCA is the Disrupt Campus program of the Université Cote d’Azur on digital innovation

and entrepreneurship. The program, based on co-creation between diverse stakeholders on real

life challenges, has the ambition to train students in soft skills (among others, creativity,

collaboration, critical thinking and problem solving,

learn to play in ambiguity). Skills that are

poorly developed in classical academic training courses. Ambitious, the programme brings

together numerous schools and partner institutions (centers of research, schools from business

to engineering, universities and local

institutions). It involves as well all students (from L1 to

postdoctoral student) in the UCA ecosystem. Together it creates a melting pot which favours

creativity, multi-field expertise and intergenerational exchanges. The creative collaboration

between all the actors is indeed at the heart of the learning process. The situated learning

approach (Stein 1998) place students in authentic learning situations where they are actively

immersed in an activity while using problem-solving skills.  

The program tackles digital transformation issues based on real business cases (DEMOLA) as

well as societal challenges (OASIS) run with NGO, diverses associations or even citizens. 

6 

 
 
 
 
​
 
 
​
​
​
​
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A focus on DEMOLA 

The objective of DEMOLA is to develop the

student’s ability to apply and reflect on his/her

knowledge as well as professional role in a

multi-disciplinary team (consisting of 4--6

students

from all

faculties and different

universities) while working on a real world

innovation

challenge

together with

a

company representative (picture 1).(cid:0) The aim

is that

the student, via utilization of

the

methods of multi-disciplinary development processes and the inclusion of relevant theories, shall

be able to analyze, develop, test and argue for solutions for the case. The students will work with

different innovation methods (IDEO Idea generation, Bottom-up primary market segmentation,

Persuasive Argumentation & Structured Thinking and Pitching) in order to qualify the case. 

A focus on OASIS (Open source Actions for Societal ImpactS) 

OASIS is a multi-disciplinary innovation project where

students co-create solutions in order to solve societal

challenges. OASIS teams work with real motivating

challenges. Students are free to work for an existing

challenge or create their own. The objective is –by open

source actions– to reach social innovation with positive

impact (on people, planet, profit). Learning expeditions

are often necessary to understand the problem in the

original context (picture 2 : Objective 80% recycling in

Corsica).  

In addition to a project based approach -so far around 30 projects and +250 participants, the

programme offers hybrid and practical expert workshops, along with creative events (hackathon,

jams, bootcamp). 

References 

Ciussi, M., & Vian, D. (2017). Le programme ID de SKEMA Business School. 

, (2), 
Entreprendre & Innover
​

93-99. 

Stein, D. (1998). 

. 
Situated learning in adult education
​

http://www.ericdigests.org/1998-3/adult-education.html  

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
Developing (Co)creativity in maker education  

Davidson 

Dr. Ann-Louise Davidson holds the Concordia University Research Chair in Maker

Culture. She is Associate Director of

the

Milieux Institute for Arts, Culture and

Technology where she created #MilieuxMake, a university research makerspace. She is

an Associate Professor of Education and she teaches in the Educational Technology

graduate programs. Dr. Davidson’s work focuses on maker culture, social innovation,

inclusion and innovating with advanced pedagogical approaches and digital

technologies. She created

, a research group that investigates the
st century workforce. She has
developed solid partnerships with schools, libraries, colleges, universities and NGOs to

potential of maker education to prepare learners for the 21

Education Makers

work together on youth motivation in stigmatized neighborhoods and marginalized

communities through concrete maker activities. She also investigates how people from

interdisciplinary fields develop identities as makers. She has expertise in action

research methodologies that engage participants in collaborative data collection and

meaning-making and hands-on studies in technology and innovation. 

Ann-louise.Davidson@concordia.ca 

Abstract 

Creativity is deemed to be one of the most important skills of the 21

st century. While we are
unable to anticipate how big this revolution will be, we know it will involve “artificial intelligence,

robotics,

the internet of

things, autonomous

vehicles, 3D printing, nanotechnology,

biotechnology, materials

science,

energy

storage and quantum computing” (Schwab,

2016, p.1). Many have argued that human

creativity, combined with empathy and critical

thinking will allow the next-gen workforce to

(co)work with the technological demands of the

th

4

industrial

revolution (Engineers Canada,

2015; Wyonch, 2018). How we define creativity

and co-creativity remains largely theoretical,

which challenges how we engage with it in

education. There is a scarcity of research that

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allows educators to observe, measure and evaluate creativity. In a quest to unpack what complex

concepts such as creativity and co-creativity are made of, I created a research group called

“Education Makers”

to develop workshop models and to document

inclusive and

intergenerational maker-led activities.

In this talk, I will present the foundations of workshop

models that allow multiple points of entry into maker education,

including micro-events and

large-scale events, highly curated events and open-design events. I will explain how educators

can help develop (co)creativity through maker education. I will discuss what we can inject in the

creative mix to encourage collective creativity, build creative confidence, creative agency,

creative destruction and creative networking. 

References 

Education Makers (

www.educationmakers.ca

) 

Engineers Canada. (2015). Engineering Labour Market in Canada: Projections to 2025. 

Schwab, K. (2016). The Fourth Industrial Revolution. World Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland. 

Wyonch, R (2018). Risk and Readiness: The Impact of Automation on Provincial Labour Markets. CD Howe

Institute. Commentary no. 499. [Added 2018-08] 

st
​ Century Competencies in Maker Education 
Keynote: 21

The maker

revolution is here (Dougherty,

2012). Everyone can be a maker. Children are

creating all

sorts of STEAM projects.

Teachers from all levels are being trained to

integrate maker-based projects

in their

classrooms (Peppler . It is the Gold Rush of

micro-prototyping technologies, robotics, 3D

printing,

laser cutting, electronic embroidery

and embedded wearables. This is partly

driven by the open-source electronic market

emerging

from Shenzhen,

online DYI

the 4

communities, data sharing over the Internet, but mostly by the worldwide movement driven by
th industrial revolution. The next workforce will be faced with the new demands of a
ubiquitous, mobile and ambient Internet of connected objects fed by AI and machine learning

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Schwab, 2016). By 2025, the World Economic Forum (2015) predicts several technological

tipping points, namely 10% of people wearing clothes connected to the internet, 1 trillion sensors

also connected to the internet, the first robotic pharmacist, the first 3D printed car in production,

and the first implantable mobile phone available commercially. This will bring unprecedented

changes because they will arrive at a speed that will affect all our systems in all continents. They

will force us to revise the nature of how we live, how we interact with each other and how we

work. Maker education is part of the solution to prepare the next generation workforce because it

confronts learners to programming languages, robotics, additive manufacturing, prototyping, the

internet of things and the sensing environment. More than just knowledge about these topics,

learners have to develop competencies that will prepare them for a complex and ever-changing

world that even experts cannot yet imagine. In this talk, I will present the global context for maker

education and an operationalized definition of how to develop competencies in this context. I will

also present results of several studies on this topic (Davidson et. al., Davidson & Price). More

specifically, I will discuss fundamental maker knowledge, attitudes, resources, and how to design

activities to mobilize competencies to complete multi-faceted projects or solve complex

problems. 

References 

Davidson. A.-L., Romero, M., Naffi, N., Duponsel, N., Cucinelli, G., Price, D., Krsmanovic, B., Ruby, I. (2017).

Les attitudes et les compétences de la culture maker.

In. A. Stockless, Lebage, I., Plante. P., Actes de
​

colloque de la CIRTA, UQAM, Montréal, 10-11 octobre 2017, pp.187-194. 

Davidson, A.-L., Price, D. (2017) Does Your School Have the Maker Fever? –An Experiential Learning

Approach

To

Developing Maker

Competencies.

LEARNing

Landscapes,

] 
https://www.learninglandscapes.ca/index.php/learnland/article/view/926
[

(1),
11
​

103-120.

Dougherty, D., (2012). The Maker Movement.

11-14. 

3,
Innovations, Technology, Governance & Globalization, (7)
​

Schwab, K. (2016). The Fourth Industrial Revolution. World Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Child-robot interaction in unstructured settings 

Charisi  

Vicky Charisi ​is a Research Scientist at the Centre for Advanced Studies, JRC of the
European Commission focusing on the impact of interactive and intelligent systems on

human behaviour and development. Her focus of research lies on the role of embodied

and social Artificial

Intelligence (social robots) on children’s learning and creative

thinking. Vicky finished her PhD studies at the UCL,

Institute of Education, London

during which

she

investigated

children’s

processes

and

interactions

in

computer-supported music-making identifying elements of collaborative creative

thinking. She has worked as a post-doctoral researcher at the University of Twente,

Human-Media Interaction group in the Netherlands with a focus on robot-assisted

science learning and play. She regularly collaborates with robotics groups and with her

research she contributes to the design and development of socially intelligent robots

and to the evaluation of those systems in real-life scenarios. Vicky is an active member

of the association Designing for Children’s Rights which is supported by UNICEF, trying

to address the emerging ethical considerations. Currently she serves as an appointed

Chair at the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society for Cognitive and Developmental

Systems TF for Human-Robot Interaction. 

Abstract 

Children in early years make sense of the unstructured environment through exploratory actions

which gradually turn into meaningful deliberate behaviours.

In this way, they first perceive

existing patterns of their environment while they act upon it in meaningful for them and creative

ways. During this process children make use of their intrinsic motivation and inherent curiosity

and are likely to take risks, make mistakes and invent novel ideas usually within playful activities.

Often this process takes place in collaborative settings where two or more children engage in

self-directed 

collaborative play, which

results in a distributed

and shared cognitive and

social

engagement.

Recently,

interactive

digital

tools have been

developed to support this

process. However, these

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
screen-based tools often do not support the cognitive and social interaction with the physical

world, which might have an impact on child’s development. To address this limitation, a new

paradigm has emerged which is based on embodied and social cognition, that of social robotic

companions. We discuss our current research which focuses on the possible impact of socially

aware robotic agents on child’s cognitive and social engagement in various settings by providing

examples from real

life scenarios in formal and informal settings. We discuss various kinds of

robot appearance (i.e. anthropomorphic features), behaviours and interventions and we review

results from the field of child-robot interaction for typically developing and autistic children. Then,

we identify emergent elements for discussion about the ways in which social robots can support

child’s learning and development as well as current methodological approaches that have been

used for the evaluation of the impact on child’s behaviour. Following this, we trigger discussion

regarding the emerging ethical considerations from a child-centred perspective and we refer to

the current debates on designing AI for children’s rights. Finally, we review first steps on

robot-assisted music-making activities as one of the current examples of social robots in highly

creative contexts and we analyse robots’ characteristics that facilitate children's collaborative

music improvisation. Towards this end we take inspiration from current work on designing robots

for collaborative music-making for adults and we identify special considerations in designing from

children’s creative process focusing on children’s inherent need for exploration. 

References 

Bamberger, j. (2014). The laboratory for making things: Developing multiple representations of knowledge. 
In Science Teachers Use of Visual Representations.Springer, pp. 291–311. https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.04741 

Charisi, V., Dennis, L., Fischer, M., Lieck, R., Matthias, A., Slavkovik, M., Sombetski, J.,Winfield, A., 
Yampolskiy, R. (2017). Towards moral autonomous systems. Ethics and Information Technology. 

Charisi, V., Liem, C., Gomez, E. (2018). Novelty-based cognitive processes in unstructured music-making 

settings in early childhood. In Proceedings Joint IEEE International Conference of Development and 

Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL-EpiRob), on IEEE, 2018, pp. 218-223. 

Charisi, V., Davison, D., Reidsma, D., & Evers, V. (2016). Evaluation methods for user-centered child-robot 

interaction. In Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), 2016 25th IEEE International 

Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication, pp. 545-550. IEEE.  

Forestier, S. & Oudeyer, P.-Y. (2016). Overlapping waves in tool use development: a curiosity-driven 
computational model. In Development and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL-EpiRob), 2016 Joint 
IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 238–245. 

Gerstenberg, T. & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2017). Intuitive theories. Oxford handbook of causal reasoning, pp. 
515–548. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creative Cultures : how co-creativity is nurtured in the 

context of game design 

Arnab 

Prof Sylvester Arnab leads research and applied innovation at the Disruptive Media

Learning Lab (DMLL) in association with the Centre for Post-Digital Cultures (CPC) and

he seeks to explore and exploit opportunities for external collaborations informed by

the infusion of innovative practices within the DMLL and applied across the University

and beyond. As a Professor of Games Science, he forefronts the investigation into the

application of playful and gameful approaches in teaching and learning practices at the

University, which include game-based learning, serious games, gamification and playful

learning. He co-founded the GameChangers – a Game Design Thinking initiative, which

is currently being adopted and adapted in other countries, such as Malaysia. The circle

of impact of current and previous work framed under the playful and gameful learning

has expanded beyond the University Group into national and international domains and

sectors. Sylvester has a large portfolio of funded projects and publications. To date, he

has successfully won projects with a total value of £19 million since 2010 from funders

including FP7, H2020, Erasmus+, NEWTON, AHRC and HEFCE. He is currently

coordinating and leading the Beaconing project

funded by the European Union’s

Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation programme, HEFCE funded Mobile

GameChangers and NEWTON CreativeCulture project. He is also leading DMLL’s

contribution to the EU H2020 Crowd4Roads project and EU H2020 BOND project.

Sylvester currently has over 90 academic publications,

including one edited book-

Serious Games for Healthcare 

Abstract 

Games, which are more readily blended with existing educational techniques and practices, are

more likely to be accepted by teachers as useful resources. Hence,

it is worth ensuring the

design of game-based learning resources might support such blending, which can range from

pragmatic considerations, such as how well an intended play session fits within a teaching

schedule or homework arrangement,

to pedagogical designs, which seek to address

shortcomings in didactic instruction. To promote the sense of ownership and autonomy in order

to break the barriers of adoption, not only that teachers should be part of the development

process but they should also be empowered to create or co-create their own games - removing

the barriers to the development of game-based learning resources.

In the CreativeCulture

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiative - a spin-off project

funded by the

Newton Fund that

is adapting the DMLL’s

GameChangers

initative,

teachers

are

empowered to create their own games towards

engaging learners with educational contents.

Game making can be used to foster

the

development of transversal skills, such as 21st

century skills, where individuals can design and

construct

their own games, often working in

teams, allowing them to engage in a task that

involves - and at

the same time fosters -

collaboration, problem solving and creativity.

Since the inception of the initiative in 2017, eighteen game-based learning resources have been

developed, which have been tested in schools. Out of

this experience,

they have also

co-produced a guideline for game-based learning to provide practical blueprints and templates

for others to adapt. The initiative has also created a set of play cards based on the lessons learnt

based on the teachers' experience, which provides useful prompts for informing educational

game design. This paper will reflect on the lessons learnt and observations, which may provide

insights on how we can remove the barriers to the process of innovating the way we teach and

learn. 

References 

Mohamad, F., Morini, L., Minoi, J., & Arnab, S. (2018.

Engaging Primary Schools in Rural Malaysia with

Game-based Learning: Culture, Pedagogy, Technology

, In Proceedings of 12th European Conference on

Game-Based Learning, 4-5 Oct 2018. pp 433-440. 

Arnab, S., Morini, L., Green, K., Masters, A., & Bellamy-Woods, T. (2017).

We are the Game Changers: An

.
Open Gaming Literacy Programme

International Journal of Game-Based Learning (IJGBL), 7(3), 51-62.

doi:10.4018/IJGBL.2017070105 

Romero, M., Arnab, S., De Smet, C., Mohamad, F., Abdelouma, S., Minoi, J. L., & Morini, L. (2018, October).

Co-Creativity Assessment in the Process of Game Creation. In European Conference on Games Based

Learning (pp. 549-XXI). Academic Conferences International Limited. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computational Thinking with CS unplugged  

Tsarava, Leifheit 

works as a research assistant at

Katerina Tsarava
für Wissensmedien,
Tübingen, Germany. She conducts her PhD research as a member of the junior research group
Neuro
. Her doctoral studies focus on the cognitive aspects of Computational
cognitive Plasticity
​
-
Thinking and Game-based Learning. She studied Applied Informatics in the University of
Macedonia (2013) and holds a Master’s degree in ICT in Education from the Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki (2016). 

the Leibniz

Institut
-

Luzia Leifheit
is a PhD candidate at LEAD Graduate School. Since 2017, she has been working in
computer science education research projects at the intersection of computer science, empirical
education sciences, and cognitive psychology. Her current focus is on developing game-based,
embodied, and conceptual methods for teaching computational thinking and evaluating them
empirically using randomized controlled field trials. 

Abstract 

At the #CreaMaker workshop, we are presenting and demonstrating

Crabs & Turtles: A Series of

, a board and card game series aimed at fostering computational
Computational Adventures
​

thinking (CT) abilities through playful and cooperative learning. 

What is computational thinking? 

Being able to think computationally means understanding complex problems, formulating them
precisely and then being able to solve them systematically. Such systematic problem solving
typically requires skills in generalization, abstraction, identifying relevant variables and patterns,
and deriving an algorithmic solution. CT is based on thinking processes such as abstraction,
generalization, pattern recognition, conditional
logic, algorithmic thinking, and partitioning a
complex problem into smaller subproblems. These processes reflect cognitive processes that
play a central role in programming. However, these processes are not domain-specific because
they are not only applicable within programming. Consequently, teaching children to think
computationally does not mean turning them into computer programmers, but helping them to
develop their ability to understand complex problems and find strategies for their systematic
solution. This is a valuable skill for creative problem solving: with CT, students learn there is never
just one correct solution, but an indefinite number of approaches for creating strategies to solve a
problem. 

CT enables students to become makers and provides them with skills and strategies for bringing
their own creations into being. By introducing CT in an unplugged way (that means without the
use of technology), the focus is placed on conceptual foundations of computing rather than on
specific technologies. Specific applications of computing technology keep evolving and changing

15 

 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rapidly, but the conceptual foundations remain largely the same and are universally transferable
to an infinite array of possible applications and creations. 

Crabs & Turtles - a board game series for fostering computational thinking 

fosters cooperative learning, we
To teach CT in a motivating and child-friendly way that
The Treasure
developed
The Race are board games, while
The Treasure Hunt and
Hunt
, 2.
​
Patterns
Crabs & Turtles was awarded with the 1st prize in the 6th
International Educational Games Competition at the 12th European Conference for Games Based
Learning. 

, which is a series of three life-size educational games: 1.
Crabs & Turtles
​
Patterns
.
The Race
and 3.
​
​
is a card game. In 2018,
​

The core computational concepts used to develop simple algorithmic solutions are the basic
concepts of sequences, loops, conditional branches, events, operators, data and variables. The
Crabs & Turtles
games introduce players to these basic computational concepts in a playful way.
​
The games are aimed at children of primary school age or younger (8 to 12 years) who can
already read, write and do simple math, but do not yet have any programming skills. However,
Crabs & Turtles is also suitable for older students as well as for adults with little to no previous
programming experience. 

Crabs & Turtles was developed in a life-size game design to promote active participation in the

game and thus increase players’ motivation, but also to support the learning process through

conceptual abstraction through embodied learning of foundational computational concepts. The

games are deliberately designed to be independent of any specific programming environments

or languages.

Crabs & Turtles was created as board and card games rather than digital games to

allow players to experience that applying CT is not limited to digital contexts, but can prove

useful

in all kinds of contexts (Tsarava et al., 2017).

In cooperative as well as competitive

scenarios, players co-creatively come up with their own strategies for winning the games.  

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

Tsarava, K., Leifheit, L., Moeller, K., & Ninaus, M. (2018). Official Crabs & Turtles website: 

https://crabsturtles.iwm-tuebingen.de 

Tsarava, K., Moeller, K., Pinkwart, N., Butz, M., Trautwein, U., & Ninaus, M. (2017). Training computational 

thinking: Game-based unplugged and plugged-in activities in primary school. Proceedings of the 11th 

European Conference on Game Based Learning, pp. 687-695. 

Tsarava, K., Moeller, K., & Ninaus, M. (2018). Training Computational Thinking through board games: The 

case of Crabs & Turtles. International Journal of Serious Games, 5(2), 25-44. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-creativity and computational thinking, the language 

issue 

Viéville  

Abstract 

Thierry Viéville is a Researcher Senior at

INRIA (National Research Institute in

Computer Science and Control Theory) where he works in Computational

Neurosciences (CN) while he teaches and advices PhD students. His research interests

after Computer Vision is now Computation Neuroscience, more precisely Visual

Perception and Adaptive Processes in Systemic Neuroscience. He now also

collaborates in educational science within the LINE laboratory, regarding computational

thinking teaching. He advised more than 15 PhD students and participated in several

international collaborations (6 EEC and 4 ANR projects) with WP responsibilities. He also

helps the INRIA board regarding Science Outreach and is now involved in the

Class´Code program of

formation of

teachers and educators regarding children

computer science education (over 30000 persons impacted for the 1st year), with some

experimental research activity in education science. 

In French, we make a distinction between human

language (une langue) and formal language (un langage)

not only related to computers (e.g., music score).

Following the Gilles Dowek recent French essay "what

can not be said must be written", we are going to

analyse the differences between the former and the

latter, because language being the vehicle of

the

thought,

it

is a major issue to understand the deep

difference between computational thinking and other

form of intellectual creation, at the language formulation

level. Understanding these deep differences at both the

syntactic and semantic levels is crucial to be able to

properly teach both informatics and human language

skills, and to see to which extents computational

thinking initiation can offer a second chance to whom

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has difficulties with other humanities. This ontological analysis will also offer us a new view about

co-creativity, when considering co-creating using a language. For instance, human languages do

not a-priori offer the capacity to create new atoms (e.g., new words) unless neologisms are

allowed and manageable, while formal language do. On the contrary, formal languages, including

music scores, have a bounded expressiveness, whereas human languages are almost not limited

at this level. Such profound variations do not lead to the fact that the former or latter is better or

worst regarding co-creativity, but that they are different, and we can not ignore such difference. 

References 

Dowek, G. (2019).

essais. 

. Le Pommier, Collection
Ce dont on ne peut parler il faut l'écrire. Langues et langages
​

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developing Creativity and unplugged 
Computational Thinking by using COMICS 

Nunes, Santos 

is an

Maria Augusta S. N. Nunes
Associate Professor at Universidade Federal de Sergipe
(UFS)/Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO) in Brazil. As a researcher she
in order to
created the project called
​
develop the Computational Thinking Pillars enabling students to be more qualified to solve their
day-life problems as well as the problems found in the disciplines of STEAM. Her research also is
directed to Affective Computing and Intellectual Property in Computer Science. 

Computer Science Popularization

. This project use

Comics

Cícero Gonçalves dos Santos is finishing his Computer Science Master's degree at Universidade
Comics for the project
Federal de Sergipe (UFS) in Brazil. As a Researcher he has developed many
Comics as
of
unplugged strategies in order to develop Computational Thinking in elementary and middle
education. 

. His Master's thesis is towards to validate

Computer Science Popularization

Abstract 

What is creativity? Brazilian society is considered to be quite creative. Maybe because of the

political, social and economical Brazilian context. It’s hard to survive considering the range of

Brazilians'

income. Then, Brazilians are usually searching and creating incredible newer

strategies to make things actually happened in order to survive daily. In the educational field, it is

not different. Teachers at elementary and middle school are always searching for new formulas in

order to motivate students avoiding to lose them to criminal organizations, for instance.

In

peripheral schools, students can hardly structure their own thinking/reasoning process correctly.

For instance make basic calculus, logic reasoning, or, even, interpret a newspaper's news could

be very tough work. In Brazil, 48% of schools have no computational infrastructure for students.

Considering this context, we proposed to use strategies to develop Computational Thinking

creatively/co-creatively among students by using unplugged stuff, such as ludic activities and

artifacts. We decided to use Comics as ludic artifacts to develop all 4 CT's pillars and also to help

to popularize and demystify concepts and theories of Computer Science. Thus we created a

Pedagogical Plan to be applied in the Portuguese and Mathematics course at 9th Grade of

Middle school in a small city in Alagoas state in the northeast of Brazil. The experiments enabled

the teacher to apply different concepts of Computer Science by using Comics in order to develop

the 4 pillars of Computational Thinking in the Portuguese and Mathematics curricula. The

20 

 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students were aged from 13 to 15 years old. We applied them two experiments for 9 weeks.

Those two experiments were developed simultaneously during 9 meetings where we applied the

Computational Thinking Pedagogical Plan (CTPP) and then we compare the results (we got

reliability Alfa de

Crombach higher than 0,7 during the test and retest (before and after those

experiments)). Both experiments of CTPP was conducted from September to October in 2018.

We had two control groups: 50 students for the first experiment and 50 students for the second

experiment. The results: For the first experiment of CTPP, we got 50 students (we applied the

CTPP to everybody). After the application of pedagogical plan, they increased their grades: in

Portuguese (+3,17) and in Mathematics (+3,214). For the second experiment, we got 50 students

(we applied the CTPP for 25 students, the other 25 we did not apply the CTPP). After the

application of pedagogical plan the 25 students who received CTPP instructions increased their

grades: (+2,692) in Portuguese; (+2,848) in Mathematics (p-valor 0,000). For the 25 remained

students who did not receive the CTPP instruction, their grades did not increase and remained

the same. As a conclusion we perceived that the use

of Comics in Portuguese and Mathematics curricula

by means of CTPP promoted more creativity in

students towards to solve their daily problems at

school as well as it improved the students' ability for

textual

interpretation and logical reasoning. We also

perceive that students revealed to be quite easily

disturbed by any external event. Thus, as a future

work, we wonder if we might decrease that by using

Mindfulness technique as well as Roots of Empathy

development. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

Nunes, M.A.S.N et al. (2019) Almanaques para Popularização de Ciência da Computação. Available at:

> Acesso em: 18 março. 2019 
/
http://almanaquesdacomputacao.com.br
<

Brackmann, C; Barone, D.; Casali, A.; Boucinha, R. and Muñoz-Hernandez, S..

(2016). Computational

thinking: Panorama of

the Americas.

In:International Symposium on Computers in Education (SIIE),

Salamanca, 2016, pp. 1-6. Available at: <

http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7751839/

>. Acesso em: 21

maio. 2017 

BRACKMANN,

C.

P.

(2019)

Pensamento

Computacional

Brasil.

Available

at:

http://www.computacional.com.br/
<

 >. Acesso em: 18 03 2019. 

Santos, C. G. (2019). Estratégias Para Implantação E Avaliação De Um Plano De Diretrizes Pedagógicas

Para O Ensino E Aprendizagem Associados Ao Desenvolvimento Do Pensamento Computacional Com

Alunos Do Ensino Fundamental Da Rede Pública De Ensino Nas Disciplinas De Língua Portuguesa E

Matemática. Dissertação de Mestrado. UFS/Brasil. 191p. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coherence through co-creativity? Task-based 

tele-collaborations in binational teacher education 

Schmider, Zaki 

Christine Schmider is Maître de Conférences at the German Department and the Teacher
Education Faculty of the University of Nice. She studied philosophy and comparative literature in
Berlin and Paris (funded by the German "Studienstiftung des Dt. Volkes") and obtained her PhD
from the Université Paris VIII after a DFG-funded graduate programme at the University of
Freiburg and the University of Paris. She is member of the National ESPE network, of the National
council of CAPES examiners, French head of
the DFH-section on German-French teacher
education, as well as responsible for the DFH/UFA teacher education program for secondary
education UNS-PHF. Her research interests comprise comparative literature and philosophy,
literature didactics, cultures of FL education as well as internationalization in teacher education. 

Katja Zaki is Junior Professor (tenure track) for Romance Languages and their Didactics at the
University of Education Freiburg and co-opted faculty member at the Faculty of Philology of the
University of Freiburg. She holds a Masters degree in International Cultural Studies from the
University of Passau, a degree for Upper Secondary Teacher Education from the University of
from the University of
Regensburg and a PhD in Romance Philology (socio-linguistics)
Regensburg. She is responsible for the DFH/UFA-funded binational teacher education program
Freiburg-Nice, member of the “media in education” group at the University of Education Freiburg,
member of the international UniCollaboration-network for tele-collaborations in higher education
and associated international researcher at the LINE/Nice. Her research interests include language
teachers,
professionalization
contact
internationalization of teacher education and CALL (computer assisted language learning).  

plurilingualism,

language

foreign

and

the

of

Abstract 

The digital transformation and migratory movements are among the phenomena that have been

changing and shaping Europe’s classrooms in recent years. Learning and teaching environments

are characterized by hybridity in many forms: by an increased cultural and linguistic

heterogeneity on one hand, by a wide range of potential multimedia arrangements on the other,

though these need not be seen independently from each other. In order to prepare future

teachers for those dynamic challenges and possibilities, an awareness of difference – as well as

of differentiation, adaptivity and collaboration, with or without using the potential of ICT – has

become vital

to any competence model

in teacher education. Accordingly, against

the

background of changing challenges, reforms in educational policies have been spurred just as

questions on educational effectiveness have risen. Two of the paradigms often stressed in this

context are competence- and coherence orientation, related to the aim of educating teachers in

an effective, “coherent” way, by integrating different domains of professional knowledge

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Baumert & Kunter, 2006; Krauss et al., 2004; Voss, Kunina-Habenicht, Hoehne, & Kunter, 2015)

as well as by bridging gaps between different phases and agents of

teacher education

(Darling-Hammond, 2013). After sketching and contextualizing the need of these structural

reforms in the German and French setting, our workshop aims at discussing a co-creative – i.e.

collaborative, co-constructivist and also personalized – approaches to coherence-oriented

teaching and learning arrangements as well as the ICT in this context. 

The paradigm of Coherence in Teacher Education 

With a stress on “coherence orientation and professionalization” in teacher education, the value

of the acquisition of Pedagogical Knowledge (PK) and Pedagogical Knowledge (PCK) has risen in

recent years, whereas the traditional

transmission of Content Knowledge (CK) has been

questioned and newly positioned in relation to other dimensions of professional competence. In

this context,

is not only essential

to ask which function each component of professional

knowledge has, but also how these components can be transmitted in integrative,

profession-oriented

and

personalized

learning

arrangements

(z. B. Cochran-Smith,

Feiman-Nemser, McIntyre, & Demers, 2008; Zlatkin-Troitschanskaia, Beck, Sembill, Nickolaus, &

Mulder, 2009) – as well as, particularly, which function and potential ICT may fulfil in this context.

Educational systems and curricula certainly serve as an important frame for the individual,

self-regulated and also co-constructive competence development of future teachers. Coherence,

however, can only be attained, when teacher education students themselves perceive, build and

co-construct the connections between different domains of professional knowledge and see the

relevance for their profession and professionalisation. 

Focus: Personalized coherence through co-creative approaches 

In

order

to

strengthen

a

personalized

and

dynamic

approach

of

coherence

orientation in teacher education,

the use of

ICT can serve as a

medium, as an object and as a the

focus. On the one hand,

ICT in

teacher education can serve as

support structures and catalysts

of coherent curricular structures,

teaching modules and reflective

learning tasks (e.g. via e-portfolios

or e-tandems,

for example). On

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the other hand, ICT can also be the focus or the object of selected courses and projects in

teacher education, be it in a subject-related or transversal way, or both. 

Example: Task-based tele-collaborations in teacher education 

Seen through the lense(s) of different educational cultures and approaches in Germany and

France, our workshops seeks to explore and discuss the potentials and restrictions of ICT in

coherent teacher education programmes by presenting and discussing the value of binational,

task-based tele-collaborations. With the aim of creating coherent teacher education programs

with innovative, interactive teaching and learning formats, in which students are encouraged to

learn collaboratively in transnational communities of practice, we started a Design Based

research Project on transnational, multilingual e-tandems in a task-based format. In this context,

traditional

formats of

task-based (language)

learning and teaching (Ellis 2013), were to be

combined with new potentials of Web 3.0- environments (Becker et al. 2016; González-Lloret &

Ortega 2016; Canto, Graaff & Jauregi 2016), in order to create course-based, content integrated

formats of

language learning and teaching through tele-collaborations with (individual and

collaborative) e-tandem-projects. Within the workshop we will present course and task designs,

discuss the impact on the competence development of students and first evaluation results. 

References  

Bobillon, J.-M., Schmider, C. & Zaki, K.

(2017). Die Praxis der Anderen? Chancen und Grenzen

transnationaler Communities of Practice im Kontext einer kohärenten Professionalisierung von

Fremdsprachenlehrkräften.

In M. Geipel & J. Koch (Hrsg.), B

edürfnisse und Ansprüche im Dialog.

Perspektiven in der Deutschlehrerausbildung 

(S. 41-59). Weinheim: Beltz.  

González-Lloret, M. / Ortega, L. (eds.). (2014).
. Amsterdam / Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
Tasks
​

Technology-mediated TBLT. Researching Technology and

Schmider, C. & Zaki, K. (2019). Die Reformen der Anderen: Kohärenz und Professionsorientierung in der

französischen Lehrerbildung. In K. Hellmann, J. Kreutz, M. Schwichow & K. Zaki (Hrsg.),

Kohärenz in der

 (S. 323-338). Wiesbaden: Springer. 
Lehrerbildung – Modelle, Konzepte, empirische Befunde
​

Van den Branden, K. (ed.). (2006): Task-based language education: from theory to practice. Cambridge:
CUP.  
van Merriënboer, J. (1997).
. Boston: Addison-Wesley. 
for technical training
​

Training complex cognitive skills: A four-component instructional design model

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MakerEd for Historical thinking 

Lille 

Benjamin Lille is an education consultant for the Quebec Federation of Independent

Schools where he advises K-12 teachers on the integration of educational technology in

the classroom. He has developed practical expertise on strategies integrating usages of

digital tools to enhance students’

learning experiences. Benjamin is also a master’s

student where he focuses on historical

thinking, creativity, maker-based activities,

computational thinking and 21st century competencies.  

Abstract 

Historical thinking, or historical reasoning, is considered to be an analytical and critical posture

where historical sources are a breeding ground in producing historical interpretation to answer

historical or historiographical questions (Yelle & Déry, 2017 ). The process of inquiring about the

past

is considered to be a creative investigation in which creativity is understood as the

emergence of ideas that are original, valuable, purposeful and as a result of agency

(Clark & Nye,

2017)

. However, historical thinking development through inquiry is a process with potential

obstacles and students’ resistance as historical inquiry can be cognitively demanding for novice

learners. Novice secondary-level learners have trouble in taking responsibility for producing an

interpretation of the past by articulating diverse historical sources because they see history as a

neutral science

(Gérin-Grataloup, Solonel, & Tutiaux-Guillon,

1994)

. High school student

resistance in admitting the interpretative nature of the past is also an important tension in

historical thinking development

(Duquette, 2011)

. There is therefore a need to induce conceptual

change for students to consider history as a creative endeavor in which interpretation is

produced rather than only considering history as a transmission of one interpretation of the past

that

is often grounded in historical myths

.
(Letourneau, Cousson, Daignault, & Daigle, 2015)

To address this issue, we thought it pertinent to

consider how maker-based activities, a growing

movement in STEAM education, could help learners

engage in a creative investigation about the past.

Learning-by-making activities, a creative computing

approach aimed at engaging the learners in the

construction of digital and tangible artefacts

To 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the use of technology, has been argued to help develop 21st century competency such

as creativity and critical

thinking

.
(Martin, 2015)

In maker-based activities, participants are

engaged in constructionist activities based on developing an idea and then designing and

creating an external representation of that idea

(Kafai & Resnick, 1996; Papert & Harel, 1991;

Sheridan et al., 2014)

. Jefferson and Anderson

(2017) highlight the potential of maker activities,

both formal and informal,

learning contexts to foster creativity. The maker movement culture

based on sharing, autonomy, iteration, participation and support

(Barma, Romero, & Deslandes,

2017; Cohen, Jones, Smith, & Calandra, 2016) could

facilitate the emergence of creative processes and

outcomes.

Considering

the

potential

of

maker-based activities in developing creativity and

critical thinking and need for student engagement

to induce conceptual change

(Limón, 2001)

, we

co-created

a

collaborative

maker-based

pedagogical sequence in which students had to

convey their

interpretation of historical events

through the usage of

the sandbox video game

.
Minecraft
​

In this sequence, students were asked to collaboratively answer an overarching

historical question by constructing a digital representation using

Minecraft of events set during

the French and Indian war. Students were invited, in teams of four, to investigate primary and

secondary sources to produce an original interpretation of their event and, on a broader scale, an

interpretation addressing the overarching question. 

Students were then invited to share their historical understanding through a collaborative

interview in which they also had to answer questions on historiographical methodology. We

created a survey adapted from Fu, Su, and Yu

(2009) and from Koole, Dionne, McCoy and Epp

(2017) to gather information on the usage of

Minecraft and on the pedagogical sequence in

general in order to use them as mirrors in a Change Lab session

(Engeström, Virkkunen, Helle,

Pihlaja, & Poikela, 1996)

. The early analysis of the Change Lab session revealed that students

were, at first, generally more engaged in building with

Minecraft

than answering the overarching
​

historical question although students progressively became more engaged in doing so.

Moreover, the Change Lab session also shed a light on the potential tension between students’

appreciation of having agency in the classroom and the effortful process that is inquiring about

the past. Finally, students participating in the Change Lab session discussed the pertinence of

inquiring about subjects on which they have high interest while having a few more teacher-led

lectures for subjects that they are less familiar or less interested in.  

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

Barma, S., Romero, M., & Deslandes, R. (2017). Implementing Maker Spaces to Promote Cross-Generational

Sharing and Learning. In 

 (pp. 65–78). Springer. 
Game-Based Learning Across the Lifespan
​

Clark, J., & Nye, A. (2017). ‘Surprise Me!’The (im) possibilities of agency and creativity within the standards 

framework of history education. 

(6), 656–668. 
49
, 
Educational Philosophy and Theory
​
​

Cohen, J. D., Jones, W. M., Smith, S., & Calandra, B. (2016). Makification: Towards a Framework for 

Leveraging the Maker Movement in Formal Education. In 

Society for Information Technology & Teacher 

 (Vol. 2016, pp. 129–135). 
Education International Conference
​

Duquette, C. (2011). 

Le rapport entre la pensée historique et la conscience historique: élaboration d’un 

modèle d’interaction lors de l’apprentissage de l’histoire chez les élèves de cinquième secondaire des 

. Université Laval. 
écoles francophones du Québec
​

Engeström, Y., Virkkunen, J., Helle, M., Pihlaja, J., & Poikela, R. (1996). The change laboratory as a tool for 

transforming work. 

(2), 10–17. 
1
, 
Lifelong Learning in Europe
​
​

Fu, F.-L., Su, R.-C., & Yu, S.-C. (2009). EGameFlow: A scale to measure learners’ enjoyment of e-learning 

games. 

(1), 101–112. 
52
, 
Computers & Education
​
​

Gérin-Grataloup, A.-M., Solonel, M., & Tutiaux-Guillon, N. (1994). Situations-problèmes et situations 

scolaires en histoire-géographie. 

, 25–37. 
Revue Française de Pédagogie
​

Jefferson, M., & Anderson, M. (2017). 

Transforming schools: Creativity, critical reflection, communication, 

. Bloomsbury Publishing. 
collaboration
​

Kafai, Y. B., & Resnick, M. (1996). 

Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking, and learning in a digital 

. Routledge. 
world
​

Koole, M., Dionne, J.-F., McCoy, E. T., & Epp, J. (2017). Makerspaces: Materializing, Digitizing, and 

Transforming Learning. In 

Handbook of Research on Transformative Digital Content and Learning 

 (pp. 211–230). IGI Global. 
Technologies
​

Letourneau, J., Cousson, C., Daignault, L., & Daigle, J. (2015). The Wall of representations: emblematic 

image and uncomfortables of the past quebec. 

(97), 497–548. 
48
, 
HISTOIRE SOCIALE-SOCIAL HISTORY
​
​

Limón, M. (2001). On the cognitive conflict as an instructional strategy for conceptual change: A critical 

appraisal. 

(4), 357–380. 
11
, 
Learning and Instruction
​
​
Martin, L. (2015). The promise of the maker movement for education. 

Journal of Pre-College Engineering 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
​
​
 
​
 
​
 
​
​
 
​
​
 
​
 
​
 
​
 
​
 
​
​
 
​
​
​
(1), 4. 
5
, 
Education Research (J-PEER)
​
​

Papert, S., & Harel, I. (1991). Situating constructionism. 

(2), 1–11. 
36
, 
Constructionism
​
​

Sheridan, K., Halverson, E. R., Litts, B., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). Learning in the 

making: A comparative case study of three makerspaces. 

(4), 505–531. 
84
, 
Harvard Educational Review
​
​

29 

 
 
 
​
 
​
​
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-creativity in maker-based education in Collège 

Beaubois (Montréal) 

Girard 

Marc-André Girard is the principal of Beaubois College in Pierrefonds, QC. He
holds a B. Ed., an M.A. in History pedagogy, an M. Ed in School Administration
and is currently a doctorate candidate in education. He focuses on
​century skills in teaching approaches as well as in the
implementing 21
in educational
school’s
environments as well as how leadership is the primary ingredient to sustain
change in education and pedagogy. 

organisation. He studies

change dynamics

st

Marc-André has been very involved in creating effective professional
development, dealing specifically with the ideas around change in education.
He has also authored many books on changes in education systems as well as
on 21
​century skills. He frequently writes in different medias. He can be
reached through Twitter : @magirard. 

st

Abstract 

In september 2016, Collège Beaubois has implemented the first makerspace in a K12 school in

Québec and most probably in Canada. The particularity of this implementation resides in the way

it was developed and created but also in the way it is now part of the student’s learning activities.  

When we decided to create La Fabrique Beaubois back in september 2015, we chose to take a

full year to plan its implementation and we wanted to include all stakeholders in the process :

administration staff, teachers, parents, students and members of the community. We wanted to

co-create it and base ourselves on the needs of its users, mainly students and teachers. This is

why we made co-creation happen through a Living Lab and a design thinking process :

innovation had to be fueled by the people who were to use it the most ! Also, we documented

every step we made to make it accessible to the francophone community who would eventually

join the maker culture : 

https://ecolebranchee.com/tag/makerspacebeaubois/ 

Everything had yet to be accomplished : interior design, human resources, material resources,

etc. We had little or no expertise so we went out of our school to get it. We met with experts,

existing fab labs in Montreal, Québec City and Ottawa as well as suppliers. We were fortunate

enough to count on supplier to test-drive 3D printers, laser-cutters and other tools. We created

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
partnerships with stores and with businesses. For example, a parent of our school has a plastic

and acrylic business. Twice a year or so, he gives us his scraps so we can use them in our laser

cutter. We save money and he avoids throwing his scraps in the garbage.  

Here’s another example of co-creation, but this time,

within class activities. Our secondary 1 (equivalent of

grade 7) students must create a intelligent city model.

We have five classes of 36 students. Each class chooses

a tourist burrough of a major metropolis (Rome, Paris,

New York, London, Montreal) and together, they must :  

1. Draw the city plan up to scale; 

2. Plan which building they must build up to scale

using 3D

solid modeling computer-aided design (CAD)

and vector drawing; 

3. Plan a route simulating public or tourist services (garbage picking, bus tour, etc.); 

4. Program a mBot to ride this path and simulate the service; 

5. Program actions from the robot : playing national anthem, contextual storytelling, lights

flashing at a specific position, etc.   

6. Simulate intelligent energy saving lighting; 

7. Create a collective website with information on the metropolis and its famous tourist

attractions or main buildings; 

8. Plant different QR codes to specific locations; 

9. Etc. 

This has to be done by a large group so the teacher’s role as a

mediator is important. He must plan the co-creation process to

insure collaboration pockets in a larger cooperation process.

Therefore, all students alternate through all workstations in La

Fabrique : programming, 3D conception, vector drawing, etc.  

The final product is a functional smart city simulation that has

been fully designed by students.

It combines academic

content extracted from math,

computer

sciences and

geography curricula. We can develop 21st century skills in the

three subject as well as teaching their content through active

learning strategies.  

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

Girard, M.-A. (2016). Un maker-quoi ? Repéré à 

https://ecolebranchee.com/un-maker-quoi/ 

Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S., Estrada, V., and Freeman, A. (2015).

Austin, Texas: The New Media Consortium.  

.
NMC Horizon Report: 2015 K-12 Edition
​

Romero,

M.

(2016).

Compétences

pour

le

https://margaridaromero.wordpress.com/2016/02/13/competences-du-21e-siecle/ 

e
.
​siècle
21
​
​

Repéré

à

Romero, M., Barberà, E. (2015).

.
Creative collaboration in online computer-supported collaborative learning
​

Repéré à 

https://fr.slideshare.net/margarida.romero/eden2015-romerobarberar05s/13 

32 

 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Literature review on creativity in education journals 

selected by the French National Board of Universities in 

education sciences 

De Smet, Raileanu, Romero 

 is an assistant professor (Maître de conférences, CNU 70) at the Université Côte 

Cindy De Smet
d'Azur (France).She is responsible for the "creativity" research line within the LINE "Laboratoire 
d'Innovation et du Numérique pour l'Education" research lab. De Smet began her career as a 
researcher and teacher trainer (2004) at the Ghent University College in Flanders (Belgium), and 
defended her PhD in 2015 at Ghent University (Belgium). Her main expertise lies in the fields of 
Game-Based Learning, Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL), the usage of 
technologies in secondary education and the design of learning materials.  
https://twitter.com/drsmetty 

Mary-Beatrice Raileanu

 is a research collaborator at the"Laboratoire d'Innovation et du 

Numérique pour l'Education" (LINE) and she is completing a master's degree in education and 

teaching at Université Côte d’Azur (France). She is an English teacher and works for the 

Cambridge English program in Nice.  

 is research director of the Laboratoire d’Innovation et Numérique pour 

Margarida Romero
l’Éducation (LINE), a research lab in the field of Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL). Full 
professor at Université Côte d'Azur (France) and associate professor at Université Laval (Canada). 
Her research is oriented towards the inclusive, humanistic and creative uses of technologies 
(co-design, game design and robotics) for the development of creativity, problem solving, 
collaboration and computational thinking. 
Margarida.Romero@Unice.fr
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Margarida\_ROMERO  

 / @margaridaromero / 

Abstract 

This research aims to review the literature on creativity in Education journals selected by the

French National Board of Universities in education sciences (CNU 70). We limited our research to

67 journals covering scholarly education, which were subsequently scanned for articles on

creativity. Only articles containing at least 5 times the word “creativity” and which were written in

French were selected (n=48). A representative sample was obtained (n=24) and analysed based

on the following criteria: a selection of keywords, definition of creativity proposed, content

analysis, disciplinary fields, and type and level of education. Preliminary analysis shows that most

articles were written from either 1) an epistemological point of view where creativity is considered

33 

 
 
 
 
​
 
​
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an aptitude to be developed by pre-service teachers and pupils; 2) a problem solving approach

where creativity is linked to characteristics such as tolerance for ambiguity and risk taking; and

mostly situated within artistic disciplinary fields, like dance, arts, written productions and drama.

An analysis of the definitions proposed often refer to the definition by Sternberg and Lubart

(1995) who describe creativity as the ability to produce work that is both novel (original) and

appropriated (useful, adapted to a context). Other characteristics of creativity point

to its

transversal dimension and its role within the creation of teachers’ professional identity. 

References 

De la Durantaye, F. (2012). La théorisation de la créativité au service de l’éducation en art. Éducation et

francophonie, 40(2), 6-22. 

Dirani, A. (2016). Mesures, développement: Le statut de la créativité en question. Éducation et socialisation.

Les Cahiers du CERFEE, (41). 

Sternberg, R. J., & Lubart, T. I. (1995). Defying the crowd: Cultivating creativity in a culture of conformity.
Free Press. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AI in Education: from books to robots 

Vandewaetere 

Mieke Vandewaetere has a background in cognitive psychology and data science.

She started research in data-analysis of e-learning environments (educational data

mining) to extract learner profiles and to support optimization of learning. She holds a

PhD in instructional psychology and technology and did research in educational

technology, personalized learning, adaptive instruction, game-based learning.

Currently, she is head of the AI lab (Flanders, Belgium) and coordinates the AI research

and AI education in Howest University College (Belgium). New research lines have

been started up focusing on simulation-based education, educational technology,

artificial intelligence, robotics, VR/AR and vital learning environments. She combines

her job at Howest with her job as an independent consultant for training young adults

in statistics, data analysis, thesis supervision. 

Abstract 

The term VUCA world is more relevant than ever (volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous)

and both knowledge and people are subject to these rapid changes inherent in the nowadays

technological

revolution. This leads to the introduction of new technologies, production

processes and business models. For this transformation to succeed, great value is put on

education, learning, training & development, both in schools as in companies or organisations, for

pupils, students and professionals as well. Nowadays’ employers expect well-trained employees.

Moreover, these employees must continue to develop in order to deal flexibly with the many

changes that are forthcoming. For example, new categories of jobs will arise; existing jobs will

(partially) be replaced. The World Economic Forum reports, for example, that almost 65% of the

jobs that pupils in current primary education will do now do not yet exist. 

Whereas learning has stayed the same for

as long as we know;

instruction and the

effectiveness of information processing has

changed a lot. No more Socratic dialogue;

no more curricula that solely exist of ex

cathedra education. Variety, differentiation,

engagement and are key concepts in

nowadays education. And again: great

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations are put towards technology as a means to enrich instruction, to assist teachers, to

enhance learning. 

Computer technology has been used in education for over 30 years. Wedding computational

intelligence and adaptive technologies with personalised learning involves major challenges, but

provides also a great potential for personalised instruction and learning. There are nearly no

limits anymore with respect to modeling and learning technologies. Increased computational

power, together with more fine grained measurements of learning (not necessarily valid or

reliable) and technologies from the domain of artificial

intelligence, user modeling, and

educational data mining provide highly sophisticated methods for the measurement, inference,

and implementation of learner data in the development of personalised learning, by means of

adaptive and/or intelligent systems. 

Virtual

tutors; virtual

teachers; robot

teachers; data-driven instruction; emotion detection in

education; … A new wave of technologies is entering our society and again, there are high

expectations towards their disruptive potential for education. 

Combined with the existing technologies, the tremendous amount of (big) data that has become

available has been demonstrated to unravel hidden layers in the learning processes and hidden

clusters in learners. Data is now used to understand learning and provide better support for

learning. Ranging from high-level figures, over academic analytics, educational data mining to

learning analytics that provide actionable intelligence for learners and teachers, the field of

education has become more data-driven than ever before. 

In this 20 minute intervention we’ll do a fast brainstorm of the ideal robot teacher for a random

student/persona that you’ll define. You’ll think about concepts as robot knowledge, social robots,

personalized robots, connected robots, coaching bots, peer robots. And most important: you’ll

draw your ideal (ro)bot teacher. 

In addition, you’ll think about the data that needs to be collected in order to prove actionable

insights that support

learners,

teachers and hence,

the learning process. You’ll discuss

prescriptive analytics, diagnostic analytics, predictive analytics and prescriptive analytics based

on data gathered by your ideal (ro)bot teacher. 

References 

Belpaeme, T., Kennedy, J., Ramachandran, A., Scassellati, B., & Tanaka, F. (2018). Social robots for 

education: A review. 

(21), 
Science Robotics, 3
​

Mohan, S., Venkatakrishnan, A., Bobrow, D., & Pirolli, P. (2017). Health Behavior Coaching: A Motivating 

Domain for Human-Aware Artificial Intelligence Research. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
Problem-solving in educational robotics 

Kamga 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Raoul Kamga has always had a keen interest in physics, chemistry, technology and their

teaching. He has a master's degree in physics and a bachelor's degree in science

teaching in high school. He is currently completing his doctorate in educational

technology at Université Laval, where He his teaching the course on the pedagogical

use of ICT for future preschool and elementary school teachers. HIs research focuses

on the pedagogical integration of robots and the development of 21st century skills.

Since November 2018, he has been a pedagogical advisor in the national service of the

RÉCIT in the field of Mathematics, Science and Technology (MST).  

Abstract 

The development of citizens is a social concern. However, this development depends, among

other things, on the skills of citizens and the environment in which they live or are expected to

live. Nowadays, this environment is being modified by technological advances such as artificial

intelligence, virtual reality technologies or robotic technologies, requiring citizens to develop a

number of skills that can contribute to their development. According to Dindar (2018) and

Eichmann, Goldhammer, Greiff, Pucite and Naumann (2019), complex problem solving is one of

the fundamental skills that 21st century citizens

must develop. Thus, it is relevant to involve the

individual

in solving complex problems. In our

study, we engaged a team of future primary

school

teachers

in a complex activity of

educational robotics. The theory of expansive

learning (Engeström,

1987, 2007; Engeström

and Sannino, 2010) is the theoretical framework

of our study. The objective of our research is to

analyse the complex problem solving skills of

future primary school

teachers. The future

primary school teachers who participated in our

study were already a team before our study. Indeed, before the data collection, the members of

this team had worked together for nine three-hour course sessions, one session per week. The

educational robotics class session was divided into two parts. The first part presented problem

solving and engaged participants in the implementation of introductory activities in educational

robotics. The objective of these introductory activities to educational robotics was to prepare

participants for the second part of the session. This second part of the session consisted of the

educational robotics activity entitled "la grue intelligente", analysed in this study. The video

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recording of the participants during the realization of the " la grue intelligente" was made,

transcribed and analyzed. The analytical method is based on the cycle of expansive learning

actions (Virkkunen and Newnham, 2013). This methodological approach is generally used to

analyse the activities of a change laboratory (Engeström, Virkkunen, Helle, Pihlaja and Poikela,

1996; Sannino, 2016; Virkkunen and Newnham, 2013). As part of our research, we adopted this

methodology to analyze the complex problems solving in an educational robotics activity. During

the analysis, we first identified the different actions deployed by the participants during the

educational robotics activity. In a second step, these actions were categorized based on the

actions of expansive learning. The results of our analysis obtained suggest that expansive

learning theory can be used as a framework for analyzing the resolution of complex problems.

These results highlight that future primary school teachers have mobilized six of the seven

actions in the expansive learning cycle. These are: questioning, analysis, modelling of new

practices, examination of the new model, implementation of the new model and reflection on

new practices. The analysis of the transition from one action to another within the expansive

learning cycle highlights the difficulty participants have in moving from modeling a solution to

examining and implementing it.  

References 

Dindar, M. (2018). An empirical study on gender, video game play, academic success and complex problem
solving skills. Computers & Education, 125, 39‑52. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2018.05.018  

Eichmann, B., Goldhammer, F., Greiff, S., Pucite, L. et Naumann, J. (2019). The role of planning in complex
problem solving. Computers & Education, 128, 1‑12. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2018.08.004  

Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental research.

Repéré à http://lchc.ucsd.edu/mca/Paper/Engestrom/Learning-byExpanding.pdf  

Engeström, Y.
Coconfiguration. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 14(1‑2), 23‑39. doi:10.1080/10749030701307689  

(2007). Enriching the Theory of Expansive Learning: Lessons From Journeys Toward

Engeström, Y. et Sannino, A.
challenges. Educational Research Review, 5(1), 1‑24. doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2009.12.002  

(2010). Studies of expansive learning: Foundations, findings and future

Engeström, Y., Virkkunen, J., Helle, M., Pihlaja, J. et Poikela, R. (1996). The change laboratory as a tool for

transforming work. Lifelong Learning in Europe, 1(2), 10–17.  

Sannino, A. (2016). Theoretical and epistemological building blocks of the Change Laboratory. Virkkunen, J.

et Newnham, D. S. (2013). The Change Laboratory A Tool for Collaborative Development of Work and

Education. Rotterdam [u.a. : SensePublishers. 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kids with Developmental Coordination Disorder playing 
with robotic cubes 

Leroy 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anaïs Leroy is a PhD student in psychology, neuropsychology, at the Laboratoire de
Psychologie Cliniques Cognitives et Sociales (LAPCOS) of the University of Nice Côte
d’Azur (France). She studies semantic and emotional information processing during the
categorisation of complex visual scenes in adults and children with or without learning
disabilities. She is an assistant lecturer in the department of psychology at the Ecole
Supérieure du Professorat et de l’Education (ESPE) and an assistant researcher at the
Laboratoire d’Innovation et Numérique pour l’Education (LINE). She is also a psychomotor
therapist working at the Reference Centre for Learning Disabilities at the paediatric hospital
of Nice CHU-Lenval. 

Abstract 

About five percent of school-age children have a Developmental Coordination Disorder (DCD). This
disorder is characterized by impaired motor abilities compared to children of the same age (APA, 2015)
and by difficulties in the use of everyday tools at home, in leisure or at school. These difficulties affect
the child's entire life
and may cause psychosocial disorders such low self-esteem and peer rejection
(Zwicker, Harris, Klassen 2013). However, despite this strong negative impact in the child daily life, few
studies have analyzed the process underlying the impairment of DCD children in tools uses. In this
project we want to compare the results of children with DCD in conventional neuropsychological tasks
evaluating executive function, visual-construction and manual dexterity with their performance in
performing a problem-solving task on unfamiliar modular robotic cubes through the CreaCube task
(Romero, DeBlois, & Pavel, 2018). For comparing the performance of children with DCD to that of
typically developing children on the CreaCube task, we will analysing their perseverance (i.e. number of
attempts and of incorrect structures) and different time benchmarks: the time of manipulation, the time
of detection of the technical characteristics of the cubes (presence of a switch, sensor, wheels), and the
total time to complete the task. The aims of this study are : 1) to explore if the difficulties of DCD
children in the use of familiar tools are also found with unfamiliar tools, 2) to analyse if the tool used
deficit of DCD children are related to motor, executive or visuo-constructif impairment. These results
may provide support for reflection on the care and schooling of children affected by this disorder. 

References 

American Psychiatric Association. DSM-5 : manuel diagnostique et statistique des troubles mentaux.
Issy-les-Moulineaux: Elsevier Masson, 2015.  

Romero, M., DeBlois, L., & Pavel, A. (2018). Créacube, comparaison de la résolution créative de problèmes,
chez des enfants et des adultes, par le biais d’une tâche de robotique modulaire. MathémaTICE, (61).  

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zwicker, J. G., & Harris, S. R. Klassen. AF (2012). Quality of life domains affected in children with
developmental coordination disorder: A systematic review. Child: Care, Health and Development, 39(4),
652-580. 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRANSFORM - a bottom-up teacher development through 

constructive alignment and collaborative teacher learning 

Timus  

Dr Natalia Timuș is Senior Educational Adviser and researcher, Head of academic

development scheme TRANSFORM at the Centre for Active Pedagogy of Université Côte

d’Azur. Natalia is also Senior Fellow of Higher Education Academy, UK. She has extensive

experience with innovative teaching and learning through teaching, training, research and

project management. She was an e-learning academic expert at FASOS, Maastricht

University (UM)

in 2010-2011, promoting online and blended learning. Natalia was the

project leader and manager of the inter-university EU TEMPUS project “Innovating Teaching

and Learning of European Studies” (INOTLES), managed by MGSOG, UM in 2014-2017.

Currently she is also partner coordinator for the Erasmus + Capacity building projects

ELEVATE (Elevating the Internationationalization of Higher Education in Moldova) and

MINERVA (Strengthening Research Management and Open Science Capacities of HEIs in

Moldova and Armenia). 

Natalia has published several book chapters and international articles on topics of

innovative pedagogies and open science. Her latest publication is 'Innovating Teaching and

Learning of European Studies: Mapping Existing Provisions and Pathways' (with V.Cebotari

and A.Hosein), JCER 12(2), 2016. Currently her research interests focus on problem-based

learning and student-centred learning, as well as (co-)creativity during the pedagogical

transformation and innovation. 

Abstract 

Quality teaching and academic staff development designed to

promote student

learning outcomes represent salient

issues

within higher education. The Bologna process and the EU higher

education policies have significantly increased their salience.

However,

teachers face multifaceted challenges regarding the

adoption and transformation of

their strategies based on

student-centred learning. This paper analyses the case study of

the design and the implementation of

the TRANSFORM staff

development scheme at the Université Côte d’Azur (UCA), France.

Based on constructive alignment approach (Armellini et al 2009;

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biggs and Tang 2011; Salmon et al 2008) and collaborative learning, TRANSFORM represents a

bottom-up pedagogical

innovation at different levels:

individual (teachers); course/programme

teams, institutional. This initiative is part of the forward-looking vision of the UCA for its active

pedagogy and blended learning.

In cooperation with the University of Northampton,

TRANSFORM also aims at establishing a professional recognition scheme for of UCA teachers by

Higher Education Academy, UK. The findings of this paper provide useful insights into the design

and implementation of teacher development that empowers individual teachers and builds the

institutional capability in student-centred and blended learning. 

References 

Armellini et al 2009; Biggs and Tang 2011; Salmon et al 2008 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ecologie, pensée complexe et résolution de problèmes: le 

cas des projets de co-création de potagers pédagogiques  

Ganne  

Virgile Ganne est actuellement étudiant de Master 2 en sciences de l’éducation à

l’université de Bourgogne, en lien avec l’IREDU.

Il consacre son mémoire au jardinage

scolaire, sous la direction de Mme Géraldine Farges. Ses autres recherches portent sur les

liens entre la pédagogie,

l’environnement et

la pensée complexe en contexte crise

environnementale. En 2018-2019, il suit en parallèle une formation pour devenir professeur

des écoles. Titulaire d’une licence de philosophie en 2013, il a réalisé des stages dans des

écoles alternatives et des fermes biologiques entre 2014 et 2017, dans le cadre de son

projet « Apprendre en Pédalant », une aventure à vélo entre la France et le Cambodge,

dont le but de était de se former à l’agriculture et d’observer les différentes techniques

pédagogiques et

leurs différents fondements philosophiques. Habité par une volonté

d’allier recherche théorique à pratique concrète, Virgile Ganne souhaite faire de ses futures

classes des espaces co-créatifs et ancrés dans leur environnement proche (familles, école,

associations, quartier, nature), dédiés au bien-être des élèves.  

Abstract 

Le jardinage scolaire est une pratique pédagogique créative ayant le potentiel d’introduire les

élèves et la communauté scolaire dans son ensemble à une grande variété de connaissances et

de compétences : environnement, biologie, alimentation, travaux manuels, mathématiques, arts

plastiques, éthique, économie, etc. Les

recherches menées sur ce thème au niveau

international

privilégient

un

angle

d’approche centré sur

l’alimentation et

s’inscrivant dans une perspective sanitaire

d’amélioration des régimes alimentaires,

face à des problèmes sociétaux de surpoids

et de carences croissants. Les chercheurs

remarquent alors, dans leur majorité, que

l’impact

du

jardinage

scolaire

sur

l’alimentation

des

enfants

est

faible.

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L’hypothèse selon laquelle une implication parentale accrue pourrait améliorer les effets des

programmes de jardinage scolaire est régulièrement émise ; en effet, l’exposition des enfants à

des pratiques contradictoires entre l’école et la maison, ou même entre la classe et la cantine,

limite potentiellement

l’efficacité des programmes de jardinage scolaire en matière

d’amélioration des régimes. Cependant, aucun programme de jardinage incluant les parents n’a

encore fait l’objet d’un travail de recherche, et aucune enquête portant sur la perception du

jardinage scolaire par les parents ou sur le partenariat école-famille dans le cadre du jardinage

scolaire n’a jusqu’à présent été menée. En nous appuyant sur une série d’enquêtes menées dans

le département des Alpes-Maritimes auprès de directeurs d’écoles,

institutrices, élèves et

parents d’élèves, nous souhaitons explorer les enjeux que recouvrent pour chacun d’eux le

jardinage scolaire et la perspective de la coéducation à ce sujet. Ce travail de recueil de données

est pensé pour préparer l’expérimentation d’un programme de jardinage scolaire s’appuyant sur

la coéducation. Nous défendrons ici une approche qualitative de type ethnographique, en

considérant chaque école comme un cas relativement unique bénéficiant d’atouts particuliers

liés à son ancrage géographique et aux personnes qui la font vivre. De ce point de vue, les

modèles de coéducation, conceptualisés par Epstein et le courant des community schools, ainsi

qu’une approche pédagogique basée sur la co-créativité, prennent tout leur sens pour penser la

pratique scolaire du jardinage en vue d’une amélioration des régimes alimentaires. La population

de notre enquête comprend plusieurs écoles primaires situées sur des territoires différents aux

publics variés. Il ressort jusqu’à présent de notre travail que le jardinage scolaire fait consensus

auprès des différents acteurs de la communauté scolaire, mais que divers obstacles empêchent

souvent de pleinement

le pratiquer. En conclusion, nous émettrons des hypothèses pour

dépasser ces obstacles, à partir de pratiques de la coéducation et de la co-créativité.  

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-créativité en essaimage massif : le cas Idéaton.  

Lefèvre, Sanabria-Z 

Saint-Clair Lefèvre

est le coordinateur pédagogique du MSc. SmartEdTech,

co-créativité et

outils numériques d'innovation pédagogique, qui est un programme international et à 90% en

ligne. Étudiant en psychologie et en art-thérapie, il s'intéresse aux différents états altérés de la

conscience induits par le son et à leurs applications / implications possibles dans l'apprentissage

et le développement cognitif. 

Pr. Jorge Sanabria-Z

est enseignant-chercheur au sein du Système Virtuel de l’Université de

Guadalajara (UDG). Ses axes de recherche ont pour objectif

le développement des

compétences du 21e siècle en utilisant une approche interdisciplinaire STEAM, grâce à la mise

en place d'un réseau de laboratoires de fabrication numérique dans les lycées. Il a également

mis au point une formation aux techniques techno-créatives pour les enseignants basée sur la

Méthode d’Immersion Graduelle [Sanabria, 2015]. 

Abstract 

IDEATON 2018 est une initiative du Festival de l'innovation Epicentro organisé par le Secrétariat

de l’innovation, la science et la technologie de l’État de Jalisco, Mexique, avec l’Université de

Guadalajara,

institution à laquelle se sont associées l’Université Concordia (Montréal) et

l’Université Côte d'Azur (Nice), pour mener à bien la recherche. L’objectif est de renforcer

l’écosystème de l'entrepreneuriat à fort impact, en favorisant une culture de l'innovation par

l'accès à la connaissance des outils numériques et la mise en réseau des talents, en phase avec

les tendances mondiales en matière d'innovation et de technologie.  

Pendant une semaine, 1000 étudiants de t

ous les établissements d'enseignement au niveau

lycée publics et privés de l'État de Jalisco sont

invités à participer à ce concours

interinstitutionnel, qui vise à encourager les agents potentiels du changement, par le biais

d’activités ludiques, dynamiques et créatives. Le but est de générer, avec une base scientifique

et technologique, des solutions innovantes aux défis de la société à partir d’une activité de

prototypage en utilisant un microcontrôleur et des composants électroniques (capteurs, moteurs,

leds, etc). Les projets sont liés en particulier aux secteurs économiques stratégiques de l'État

mexicain (par exemple, Santé, Électronique, Transportation et Construction), dans la lignée des

objectifs du développement durable de l'ONU. 

47 

 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L'Ideaton comporte 4 modules -Épreuve de sélection, Camp d'alignement, Suivi des gagnants et

Récompenses finales-. A la suite de la compétition, les lycéens ont accès pendant un an à une

plateforme numérique et à différentes activités de formation afin qu’un suivi de chacun puisse

être établi.  

References 

Alatorre, K. (2018, October 2). 

, Universidad 
Con Ideatón 2018, participa UDGVirtual en el Festival Epicentro
​

de Guadalajara. Retrived from 

http://www.udg.mx/es/noticia/ideaton-2018-participa-udgvirtual-festival-epicentro 

Gallegos, A. (2018, October 1). 

. Retrived from 
Innovación accesible, propósito de quinto Festival Epicentro
​

https://www.informador.mx/economia/Innovacion-accesible-proposito-de-quinto-Festival-Epicentro-201810

01-0094.html 

Sanabria, J. (2018, November 8). 

. Retrived from 
Ideaton 2018 (D3) Epicentro - Festival de Innovación
​

https://youtu.be/eZnc7p\_k8DA 

United Nations (2016, January 18). 

 Retrived from 
Sustainable Development Goals.
​

https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/fr/objectifs-de-developpement-durable/ 

Zepeda, K. (2013, May 22). Secretaría de Innovación, Ciencia y Tecnología, Gobierno de Jalisco. Retrived 

from

https://sicyt.jalisco.gob.mx/ 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
​
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-creativité dans la démarche créative du CurriqVideo  

Faller, Heiser 

, PRAG à l’ESPE de Nice, département d’histoire 
Christine Faller
​

géographie. Docteure en histoire, associée à LINE – Université de Nice. 

. PRCE au département TICE de l’ESPE de Nice. Doctorant
Laurent Heiser
​
​
au laboratoire IMSIC Toulon sous la direction de Philippe Bonfils. Dans sa

thèse, il s’intéresse à l’expérience des élèves dans le cadre de séances

pédagogiques menées par des primo enseignants. Sa méthodologie est

assise sur le paradigme de l’énaction. Associé à LINE,

il alimente une

réflexion autour d’un dispositif de formation à la techno créativité. 

Abstract 

Le projet CurriQvidéo est un dispositif de formation qui permet aux étudiants de l’ESPE, pendant

la formation initiale, de mener une enquête vidéo sur leur apprentissage d’une pédagogie techno

créative (Romero, 2016).

Ils doivent verbaliser sur des éléments d’objectivation qui

leur ont

permis de créer du sens autour de la mise en œuvre d’un scénario de résolution de problème et

procéder à une collecte de données de traces subjectives de l’agir des élèves. Notre cadrage

théorique s’appuie sur l’énaction (Rosch, Thompson, & Varela, 1993), à la fois pour permettre

d’identifier les productions de sens des enseignants pendant leur apprentissage de la mise en

œuvre didactique et pédagogique d’un cadre techno créatif et pour s’intéresser à

l’apprentissage situé des élèves lorsque ces derniers créent du sens pour résoudre un problème,

en particulier quand ce dernier fait références à l’enseignement moral et civique. La capsule

vidéo montre que les enseignants en formation doivent questionner certaines représentations

liées à leur rôle institutionnel, favoriser l’utilisation anthropocentrée (Albero, 2010)d’outils et de

médias éducatifs tout au long de leur enquête pour favoriser l’engagement socio créatif des

élèves. Nous montrons que le Currriqvidéo est une formation expérientielle à la techno créativité

permettant aux enseignants de prendre progressivement conscience de la nécessité de maîtriser

leur posture professionnelle pour

développement de compétences du 21

​siècle.   

favoriser une éducation de qualité en lien avec le
ème

La mise en place du dispositif doit permettre à l’enseignant du supérieur de mener ses étudiants

néo professeurs sur la voie de l’appropriation des compétences didactiques nécessaires à des

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enseignements de sciences humaines soutenus par des habiletés techniques en lien avec le

numérique éducatif (Nadine Postiaux, Philippe Bouillard et Marc Romainville, 2010). Du point de

vue des élèves, dans chaque curriQvidéo, une situation problématisée leur est proposée et elle

traite de questions de société comme la lutte contre les discriminations,

les aménagements

urbains de demain,

l’écocitoyenneté ...

Les élèves sont mis en situation de réfléchir

collectivement à des solutions à apporter à ce questionnement. Ils débattent, confrontent leurs

idées et arrêtent une décision démocratiquement.  

Un corpus de plus de 200 curriQvidéos nous permet de rendre compte de l’« agir » des élèves,

de la possible et nécessaire interdisciplinarité (Hertig, 2018) mais également l’expérimentation

des valeurs (Falaize, 2018) pour une meilleure appropriation des notions et concepts. Enfin, la

techno créativité (Romero, 2016) appréhendée à plusieurs échelles (professeur et élève), est

rendue visible et permet d’accéder à l’expérience vécue des valeurs par les élèves et à la mise

en œuvre de la compétence inscrite dans le référentiel de compétences de l’enseignant à savoir

« faire comprendre et partager les valeurs de la République ». 

References 

Falaize, B. (2018).

.
Territoires vivants de la République: Ce que peut l'école : réussir au-delà des préjugés
​

Paris: La Découverte. 

Hertig, P. (2018). Géographie scolaire et pensée de la complexité.

, vol. 82(3),
L'Information géographique
​

99-114. 

Postiaux N., Bouillard P. et Romainville M. (2010). « Référentiels de compétences à l’université »,

Recherche

, 64 | 2010, 15-30. 
et formation
​

Roméro, M. (2016). Jeux numériques et apprentissages. JFD édition, 117 pages. 

Romero,

M.

(2016).

Compétences

pour

le

https://margaridaromero.wordpress.com/2016/02/13/competences-du-21e-siecle/ 

e
.
​siècle
21
​
​

Repéré

à

Rosch, E., Thompson, E., & Varela, F. (1993).

L’Inscription corporelle de l’esprit. Sciences cognitives et

. Paris: Seuil. 
expérience humaine
​

Tardif J. (2006).

, Montréal :
L’évaluation des compétences : documenter le parcours de développement
​

Chenelière-éducation. 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Activités d’apprentissage en éducation supérieure selon le

modèle ICAP  

Dordevic, Mirbel, Romero  

Anja Dordevic

is a first year PhD fellow in the field of Education Sciences in the Laboratoire
​

d’Innovation et Numérique pour l’Education (LINE). She conducts her thesis within the 10-year

project called “L@UCA” that aims at transformation of undergraduate level studies at University of

Côte d'Azur. Her research focuses on Competency-Based Education (CBE) in Higher Education

context and in particular teaching methods within CBE approach. Anja has previously obtained a

Master degree in Education Policy at University of Belgrade and Master degree in Education

Technology at Centre de Recherche Interdisciplinaire. 

l

 est Maître de conférences en informatique. Ses activités de recherche s'inscrivent 
Isabelle Mirbe
dans les domaines de l'ingénierie des systèmes d'information, de l'ingénierie des méthodes et de 
l'ingénierie des besoins. De 2012 à 2018, elle a été vice-doyenne de la faculté des sciences en 
charge de l'insertion professionnelle et des relations avec les entreprises puis en charge de la 
pédagogie. Depuis deux ans, elle coordonne les activités de mise en place de l'approche par 
compétences au sein de l'UFR Sciences et des différentes composantes de l'Université de Nice 
Sophia Antipolis. Elle est également en charge du projet Sciences à la carte, en lien avec 
l'Université Numérique Thématique Unisciel, qui vise à développer les ressources numériques en 
ligne et plus précisément les tests d'auto-positionnement pour faciliter l'orientation des étudiants 
en licence. 

est directrice du Laboratoire d’Innovation et Numérique pour l’Education (LINE) 

Margarida Romero 
de l’ESPE de Nice chez Université Côte d’Azur et professeure associée à l’Université Laval au 
Canada. Ses recherches sur la cocréation numérique visent le développement des compétences 
dites du 21e siècle, notamment la pensée informatique (projet Class’Code), la résolution de 
problèmes (projet #CréaCube), la créativité (projet ANR 2018 #CreaMaker) et la cocréation de jeux 
numériques en contextes intergénérationnels (ACT, Social Sciences and Humanities Research 
Council, Canada). 
Margarida.Romero@Unice.fr
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Margarida\_ROMERO  

 / @margaridaromero / 

Abstract 

Au cours des dernières années,

les universités européennes ont mis en place différentes

initiatives dans le but de développer une pédagogie universitaire de qualité. Dans ce contexte, le

projet L@UCA (NCU PIA3) vise à transformer la pédagogie universitaire afin d’améliorer la

réussite des étudiants en licence. La thèse au sein du projet L@UCA a pour objectif d’étudier

l’évolution des pratiques pédagogiques dans le contexte d’une approche par compétences

(APC). Les pratiques pédagogiques des enseignants sont étudiées à partir de l’identification des

activités d’apprentissage planifiées (syllabus) et de leur mise en oeuvre effective pendant les

cours. L’étude sera menée, à la fois, du point de vue de l’enseignant et de l’étudiant. Dans ce but,

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
un premier travail a consisté à identifier et classifier les différentes activités d’apprentissage en

pédagogie universitaire à partir du modèle ICAP (Chi, 2009; Chi & Wiley, 2014). ICAP est un cadre

théorique qui vise à différencier les activités d’apprentissage selon le niveau d’engagement

cognitif qu'elles exigent.

Il consiste de quatre modalité -

Interactive (qui concerne des activités

avec le niveau d’engagement plus élevé, par exemple le débat entre pairs) puis

Constructive (par

exemple la prise de notes avec ses propre mots), ensuite Active (eg. soulignement du texte) et

Passive qui se réfère aux activités qui exigent le moins d'engagement cognitif, comme par

exemple écoute de cours sans faire rien d’autre).  

References 

. Maidenhead, UK: Open University
Biggs, J., & Tang, C. (2011). Teaching for Quality Learning at University
​

Press.  

Chi, M. T. H., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP Framework: Linking Cognitive Engagement to Active Learning

Outcomes. 

, 49(4), 219-243. 
Educational Psychologist
​

Chi, M. T. H. (2009). Active-constructive-interactive A conceptual framework for differentiating learning

activities. 

, 1, 73-105. 
Topics in Cognitive Science
​

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Construire pour écrire : la manipulation au service de la 
rédaction 

Brunel, Dias-Chiaruttini 

Magali Brunel
l'université Nice Sophia-Antipolis, membre du groupe de recherche LiNE et de LITEXTRA, composante

est maître de conférences habilitée à diriger des recherches au sein de l'ESPE de

du laboratoire LIT&ARTS, à l’université Grenoble-Alpes. Ses travaux de recherche portent sur

l'enseignement de la lecture/littérature à l'ère du numérique. Elle expérimente de nouvelles pratiques

d’enseignement intégrant les outils et ressources numériques et cherche à adapter les pratiques sociales

culturelles numériques dans le contexte scolaire. Elle a notamment coordonné l’ouvrage
(Peter Lang, 2018).  
de la littérature avec le numérique 
​

L’enseignement

Ana Dias-Chiaruttini est maitre de conférences à l’Université de Cote d’Azur en sciences de

l’éducation et membre du laboratoire LINE. Ses travaux s’inscrivent dans le champ de la

didactique du français et portent sur l’enseignement de la littérature et la formation d’une culture

artistique en interrogeant la place et les effets des nouveaux médias. Elle dispense ses cours à

l’ESPE de Nice.  

Abstract 

Cette communication s’appuie sur une recherche expérimentale et collaborative menée avec des

enseignants du secondaire français. Il s’agit de faire produire aux élèves, répartis en groupe, un

texte descriptif à partir d’une maquette réalisée au préalable qui représente un lieu du

Meilleur

, en lien avec l’œuvre lue en classe. Dans un second temps, le passage à l’écriture
des mondes
​

sur écran par des binômes permet aux élèves d’intégrer leur production dans le texte littéraire. 

L’analyse porte sur les observations filmées réalisées par les enseignants selon un protocole

précis et les productions des élèves. Nous situons notre réflexion en didactique du français et de

la littérature dans les approches portant à la fois sur la description et la production sur écran afin

de comprendre d’une part si la manipulation avant la production écrite est un élément facilitateur

et mélioratif des textes descriptifs produits par les élèves et d’autre part nous cherchons à

déterminer les effets de l’écriture collaborative sur écran sur la qualité des textes des élèves

insérés dans le texte littéraire. Nous analysons ainsi des formes d’écriture créative et

53 

 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collaborative articulées au texte littéraire en analysant l’impact des outils (maquette et écran) sur

le processus créatif et la réception qui est ainsi réalisée du texte littéraire. 

Reference 

Brunel M. et Guérin-Callebout C. « Écrire dans » : Écriture littéraire sur écran. Présentation d’une

expérimentation en classe de 3 année du secondaire.

Revue de recherches en littératie médiatique

, 3, 2016.
multimodale
​

https://doi.org/10.7202/1047128ar 

Constant-Berthe N.

Écrire en français et en mathématiques.

Étude comparée de discours et de pratiques.

L’exemple de la description,

Thèse de Doctorat présentée sous la direction d’Yves Reuter, Université
​

Charles-de-Gaulle – Lille III, 8 décembre 2005. 

, Thèse de
David-Chevallier M.-Ch. Le référent dans la consigne descriptive : outil ou obstacle pour l’élève
​

doctorat, sous la direction d’ Yves Reuter, Université de Lille III, 25 septembre 2007. 

Douek, N. 2014 : La didactique des domaines d’expérience et l’encadrement de la conceptualisation. In

J.-P. Bernié et M. Brossard (Ed.)

Vygotski et l’école - Apports et limites d’un modèle théorique pour penser

. Presses Universitaires de Bordeaux. 
l’éducation et la formation
​

Ferrand M.F. et Maisonnet A.C., 

, Lyon : CRDP, 2008. 
Le langage, quelle aventure
​

Jeanjean M.F. et Massonet J., 

, Paris, Retz, 2001. 
Pratiques de l’oral
​

Reuter Y., Repenser la description ? 

, n° 99, 1998a. p. 5-26. 
Pratiques
​

Reuter Y.,

La description. Théories, recherches, formation, enseignement, Villeneuve d’Ascq, Presses

Universitaires du Septentrion, 1998b. 

Tauveron C. « Et si on allait voir du côté des écrivains… »,

, 1999, p. 19-21. 
toutes les disciplines
​

Ana Dias-Chiaruttini 

, n° 373,
Cahiers pédagogiques
​

Décrire dans

Dias-Chiaruttini A., (sous presse). « Que peut la didactique du français dans la relation école-musée ? In

Boyer P., Falardeau E., Gauvin I. & Tremblay O. (dirs).

Diffusion & influences des recherches en didactique

. Montréal : Presses de l’Université du Québec. 
du français
​

Dias-Chiaruttini A., (2018). « Réceptions scolaires du

Petit Prince d’Antoine de Saint Exupéry. La formation

éthique du

lecteur scolaire. In

Peter Lang, p. 303-315. 

Rouvière N. (dir.)
​

, Berlin,
Enseigner la littérature en questionnant les valeurs
​

Dias-Chiaruttini A. (2018). La relation littérature-peinture à l’école et au musée : Repenser l’activité de
réception ?. In Chabanne J.-C. (dir.)
. Namur : Presses
Enseigner la littérature en dialogue avec les arts
​
universitaires de Namur, p. 86-104. 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Brunel M. (2018) « Renouveler la lecture de l’œuvre intégrale : la ressource de la fan fiction », Grenoble,

Colloque académique, 7 février 2018. 

Brunel M. (2018) « Les fanfictions : s’approprier les textes en devenant auteur », PNF, Le Rendez–vous des

Lettres 2018, Qu’est-ce qu’un texte pour la classe ? Corpus, texte, et interprétation, mai 2018. 

Brunel M. (2017) « Les fanfictions, espaces d’appropriation et de co-interprétation », colloque écriTech'8,

Nice, mai 2016. 

Brunel M. (2018) « Les écrits de fanfiction dans la classe »,

Le français aujourd’hui,

La conversion du

, 200, Mars 2018, 31-42. 
littéraire
​

Brunel M. & Guérin-Callebout C. (2017) « Écrire dans », écriture littéraire sur écran. présentation d’une

expérimentation en classe de 3

e année du primaire.

in

Revue de recherche en littératie médiatique

multimodale,

L’écriture

numérique

à

l’école,

nouvelles

textualités,

nouveaux

http://litmedmod.ca/sites/default/files/pdf/r2-lmm\_vol3\_brunel.pdf 

,
enjeux
​

3.

(2017) Brunel M. & Quet F.

La lecture et les ressources numériques : état des lieux des pratiques

d’enseignement dans le secondaire en France »,

Revue de recherche en littératie médiatique multimodale,

Du texte à l’écran : nouveaux corpus, nouvelles pratiques dans l’enseignement de la littérature, 5,

http://litmedmod.ca/sites/default/files/pdf/r2-lmm\_vol5\_brunel-quet.pdf 

(2016) Brunel M. & Quet F.
présomptueuses et adaptation aux besoins ». 

, 83-94. 
Recherches, 64, Aider
​

« Les ressources numériques et la littérature en classe, entre ambitions

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Littératie numérique et co-créativité 

Lacelle 

Nathalie Lacelle est professeure en littératie médiatique au département de didactique des

langues à l’Université du Québec à Montréal. Membre fondateur du Groupe de recherche en

littératie médiatique multimodale en 2009 (litmedmod.ca) et de la Revue en LMM (r2lmm.ca), elle

est Titulaire de la Chaire UQAM en LMM (2017-2021). Ses recherches portent sur

le

développement de compétences numériques et multimodales intégrant celles de la littératie en

contexte scolaire (CRSH, 2010-2013) et extrascolaire (CRSH, 2013-2017). Elle se spécialise dans

l’élaboration et l’expérimentation de dispositifs didactiques de lecture/production de textes et

d’hypertextes/hypermédias (FQRSC, 2013-2017) et documente les processus d’écriture et de

lecture numériques (MELS, 2015-2016 et FRQSC, 2016-2018). Elle est

responsable d’une

recherche-design sur La littératie médiatique multimodale appliquée en contexte numérique pour

former les apprenants à la recherche documentaire et à la création artistique (CRSH, 2017-2020)

et d’une recherche-action en Soutien au développement de démarches d'édition numérique

jeunesse au Québec (FRQSC, 2017-2020). Elle est aussi co-responsable d’une enquête

internationale sur les compétences des jeunes en littératie médiatique (2018-2021). Elle a publié

une cinquantaine d’articles depuis 2010 et est co-éditrice avec M. Lebrun et J.-F. Boutin du

collectif La littératie médiatique multimodale paru en 2012 et co-auteure du manuscrit La littératie

médiatique multimodale appliquée en contexte numérique (Lacelle, Boutin, Lebrun, 2017). 

Abstract 

Dans le cadre d’une recherche design sur la littératie médiatique multimodale appliquée en

contexte numérique pour former les élèves à la recherche et à la création (Lacelle, Boutin, Martel,

Richard, Lebrun, 2017-2020), nous avons cocréé des dispositifs didactiques adaptées aux

ressources humaines, numériques, matérielles et

thématiques des écoles secondaires

participantes. Cette adaptation de l’équipe de recherche aux intentions disciplinaires en

enseignement du français, aux idées de projets et aux ressources des milieux pour mobiliser les

compétences en LMM@ a donné lieu à une redéfinition des rôles des acteurs et des objets dans

l’élaboration de dispositifs didactiques. Dans le cadre de cette communication, nous allons

documenter deux designs de cocréation de dispositifs didactiques pour en saisir

les

agencements propres à chaque projet afin d’en dégager quelques principes (théoriques et

didactiques) émergeant de la démarche. 

Nous allons d’abord présenter le protocole de notre recherche design, soit l’ensemble des

principes et des approches méthodologiques destiné à étudier l’élaboration de dispositifs

didactiques intégrant des ressources numériques dans des cadres réels complexes – qui comble

l’écart entre théorie et pratique, et vise l'innovation. Ces méthodologies se basent sur une

théorie du savoir voulant que le sens émerge et soit incarné dans la coparticipation des

chercheurs, des praticiens et des participants dans des contextes bien définis (

Anderson et

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shattuck, 2012, Basque, Contamines et Maina, 2010; Wang et Annafin, 2005), par exemple au

cours de l’observation de pratiques co-construites, conséquence du design et de l’innovation, en

classe à l’occasion d’un enseignement-apprentissage en cours d’évolution (Boutin et Lacelle,

2017). 

Nous allons ensuite clarifier

les fondements des savoirs introduits dans les dispositifs

didactiques, notamment les notions de ressources et de milieux numériques (Bouchardon et

Cailleau, 2018), de dispositif de cocréation (Richard, Théberge et Majeau 2017), de recherche

documentaire numérique (Boubée et Tricot, 2011; Coiro, 2007), de production artistique

numérique (Gervais et Saemmers, 2011) et de compétences en LMM@ (Lacelle, Boutin, Lebrun,

2017). La cocréation implique la participation collaborative de divers intervenants dans plusieurs

ou toutes les étapes de création d’une activité, de sa conception à son évaluation. En contexte

scolaire, elle peut aussi

impliquer les élèves dans le choix d’un sujet, la mise en œuvre d’un

projet, etc. Les ressources numériques sont

les moyens offerts par

les environnements

technologiques (ex. : outils, supports numériques) pour comprendre et créer à l’aide de l’écrit, de

l’image, de la gestuelle et du son. 

Puis, nous allons décrire les designs de co-création et justifier la démarche adoptée par les

équipes dans deux écoles de Montréal. Nous allons présenter les données recueillies sur les

participants, leurs rôles, leur implication, les milieux, les ressources, les dispositifs didactiques et

les productions des jeunes. Enfin, nous verrons comment la LMM entraîne un changement dans

la dimension praxéologique de la didactique (Halté, 1992; Dauney et Reuter, 2008), car non

seulement de nouveaux outils sont-ils désormais requis pour accéder à un savoir littératié, mais
également ce savoir est-il désormais indissolublement lié à sa forme, à son « mode ». 

References 

Anderson, T. et Shattuck, J. (2012). Design-Based Research: A Decade of Progress in Education Research?

, vol. 41, 1, p. 16-25. 
Educational Researcher
​

Basque, J., Contamines, J. et Maina, M. (2010). Approches de design des environnements d’apprentissage.

Dans Charlier, B. et Henri, F. (dir.), 

 Paris: PUF, p. 109-119. 
Apprendre avec les technologies.
​

Bouchardon

, S. & 

Cailleau

, I. (2018). Milieu numérique et « lettrés » du numérique. 

, 
Le français aujourd'hui
​

200,(1), 117-126. 

Boutin, J.-F. et Lacelle, N. (2017). Une approche méthodologique prometteuses en didactique du français:

la

. L'innovation en didactique: de la conception à l'évaluation de dispositifs (Dolz et
design
-
recherche
​
​
, Revue de l’Association des didacticiens de français, no 62. 
La lettre
Lacelle, dir.). 
​

Boubée, N. et Tricot, A. (2011). L'activité informationnelle juvénile. Paris : Hermès Lavoisier. 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
Broekhuizen van, L. (2016) The Paradox of Classroom Technology: Despite Proliferation and Access, 

Students Not Using Technology for Learning. 

. 
AdvancED Research
​

Coiro, J.

(2007).

Exploring Changes to Reading Comprehension on the Internet: Paradoxes and

 (Thèse de doctorat). Mansfield : University of Connecticut.  
Possibilities for Diverse Adolescent Readers.
​

Dauney, B. et Y. Reuter (2008). La didactique du français : questions d’enjeux et de méthodes.

137-138, 57-78. 

,
Pratiques
​

Gervais, B. et Saemmer, A. (2011). Esthétiques numériques. Textes, structures, figures. 

, 39(1), 5-8. 
Protée
​

Halté , J.-F.(1992). 

 Paris: PUF. 
La didactique du français.
​

Hayles, K. (1999). 

 Chicago : University of Chicago Press. 
How We Became Posthuman.
​

Jewitt, C. (2005). Multimodality, Reading and Writing for the 21st Century.

Discourses: studies in the

vol. 26, 3, september, p. 315-331. 
cultural politics of education, 
​

Siegel, M.

(2012). New Times for Multimodality? Confronting the Accountability Culture.

Journal of

, vol. 55, 8, p. 671-680. 
Adolescent & Adult Literacy
​

Lacelle, N., Boutin, J.-F et Lebrun, M. (2017). Littératie médiatique appliquée en contexte numérique-

LMM@. Outils conceptuels et didactiques. Ste-Foy : Presses de l’Université du Québec. 

Reuter,

Y.

(2007).

La

conscience

disciplinaire.

Education

et

didactique,

1

(2)

:

https://educationdidactique.revues.org/175 

Richard, Théberge et Majeau 2017. Le dispositif de création/médiation Amalgame : croiser les postures et

transgresser les frontières. 

Revue de recherches en littératie médiatique multimodale , 

. 
6
​

Rowsell, J. (2013). Working with Multimodality : Rethinking Literacy in a Digital Age. Londres : Routledge. 

Wang, F. et Hannafin, M. J. (2005). Design based research and technology-enhanced learning 

environments. 

, 53 (4), p. 5-23. 
Educational Technology Research & Development
​

58 

 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
Conclusions  

Davidson, Lille  

Dr. Ann-Louise Davidson holds the Concordia University Research Chair in Maker

Culture. She is Associate Director of

the

Milieux Institute for Arts, Culture and

Technology where she created #MilieuxMake, a university research makerspace. She is

an Associate Professor of Education and she teaches in the Educational Technology

graduate programs.  

Ann-louise.Davidson@concordia.ca 

Benjamin Lille is an education consultant for the Quebec Federation of Independent

Schools where he advises K-12 teachers on the integration of educational technology in

the classroom. He has developed practical expertise on strategies integrating usages of

digital tools to enhance students’

learning experiences. Benjamin is also a master’s

student where he focuses on historical

thinking, creativity, maker-based activities,

computational thinking and 21st century competencies.  

After an intensive two-day program, involving scholars and practitioners from France, Germany,

Greece, Italy, Spain, Senegal, Cameroon, Québec, Canada and Mexico, from diverse disciplines

and epistemologies, we felt both excited and humbled. On one hand, we discussed creativity and

co-creativity at length. On the other hand, we quickly realised that we all have a lot to learn and

discover about co-creativity in robotics and maker education. Each individual only had one

portion of the answer and these two days allowed us to collectively unpack at the phenomenon

in all its complexities and intricacies.  

We were reminded that the growth of scientific knowledge in the cognitive and learning sciences

did not happen without conflict. This becomes evident when trying to define co-creation in

robotics and maker education –we are careful not to offend colleagues from « other » paradigms

and more empirical epistemologies. Regardless of how impossible some definitions might appear

at the moment, if we want to move ahead we have no choice but to make a tentative to go further

to unpack the terminology through experiences and guiding concepts and principles.  

The #CreaMaker workshop: co-creativity, robotics and maker education, was an attempt to

address the problem of relevance of what we teach for the 21st century global challenges we

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
face, both in terms of the future of work and for the emancipation of human beings. The pretext

was to unpack several politically charged terminology, namely the dichotomy between maker

education and the learn to code movement, and the values of grey between the two poles.  

Our topics included presentations and workshops around constructivist, constructionist and socio

constructivism theoretical underpinnings, communities of practice, computational

thinking,

unplugged activities, prototyping and innovation for start-ups, designing games for learning,

board games to teach computational thinking, human language and formal language, coherence

in teaching practices, empowering learners to co-construct meaning and invent

through

traditional disciplines, building makerspaces in schools, and learning with and from robots. 

We highlighted several concerns around robotics and maker education, which is frequently

presented as kits that offer episodic experiences to learners who wish to learn something

concrete using code, hardware, microcontrollers, disruptive technologies and other materialities.

We also highlighted concerns around merely learning to code which does not necessarily lead to

computational

thinking. Should we study micro-tasks and observe learners when solving

contained problems, or should we study ill-defined tasks and open problems? After hours of

exchanging on the debate, we concluded that they are both part of a system that has yet to be

fully exploited. 

We mutually agreed that this new mix of maker education, robotics, games and code has

undisputed potential

for 21st century education.

It

increases creativity, critical

thinking,

collaboration, collaborative problem-solving and computational

thinking.

Indeed, during

maker-based activities, participants are usually seeking creative or innovative solutions,

in a

individually or collaboratively way, to solve problems in their community while also developing a

deeper understanding on how electronic components work. This can also allow them to also

develop an understanding on how connected and automated objects such as (...) work. Maker

education can also help underserved and disadvantaged communities, that don’t have the

resources or revenues to buy material necessities, in creating artefacts with used or low-cost

materials. 

Some important distinctions need to be made. For starters, we have a need to go beyond

learning to code, distinguish between structured learning experiences and lifelong learning or

open learning. We need to continue mixing the disciplines and confront various epistemologies.

We need to open channels between formal educational settings, such as schools, colleges and

universities, informal settings, such as community organizations and public libraries. We need to

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
View publication stats
View publication stats

push it one step further and create links with start-ups and emerging markets that exploit the

Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, emergent and disruptive technologies.  

Looking ahead we need to ground theory into practice, to address the needs of learners that

don’t necessarily learn through memorization or cannot focus on textbook material for long

periods of time, for those who ask “Stop talking about what this is and show me how to do it” or

those who dare to ask the dreaded question: “Why are we learning this? What is the purpose?” 

By forecasting the societal expectations of the future of work

, we have certainly accomplished

a lot in the past 4-5 years in schools. We built makerspaces and open creative spaces. We

developed a positive relationship regarding co-creating with technologies. We are better

informed about

the use of

tools such as 3D printers,

laser cutters, electronic embroidery

machines, power tools and even hand tools. We have demystified the interaction between

electronic components such as microcontrollers, sensors, microcomputers. We have encouraged

many teachers in accepting to learn alongside students when leading maker-based activities. We

have accompanied youth in reusing objects from their environment to construct other objects to

explore new and traditional materials, to transform material to serve specific purposes and to fix

things that are broken or technologies they wish to revive.  

All these accomplishments were done through mixing it up.  

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
