A new method for quantifying treeline-ecotone change based on multiple
spatial pattern dimensions Déborah Birre, Thierry Feuillet, Roman
Lagalis, Johan Milian, Frédéric

Alexandre, David Sheeren, Roberto Serrano-Notivoli, Matthieu Vignal,

Maaike Y Bader

To cite this version:

Déborah Birre, Thierry Feuillet, Roman Lagalis, Johan Milian, Frédéric
Alexandre, et al.. A new method for quantifying treeline-ecotone change
based on multiple spatial pattern dimensions. Land- scape Ecology, 2023,
38, pp.18. ￿10.1007/s10980-022-01589-4￿. ￿hal-03942369￿

HAL Id: hal-03942369

https://hal.inrae.fr/hal-03942369

Submitted on 17 Jan 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

Landsc Ecol https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-022-01589-4

RESEARCH ARTICLE

A new method for quantifying treeline‑ecotone change based on multiple
spatial pattern dimensions

Déborah Birre · Thierry Feuillet · Roman Lagalis · Johan Milian ·
Frédéric Alexandre · David Sheeren · Roberto Serrano‑Notivoli ·
Matthieu Vignal · Maaike Y. Bader

Received: 5 October 2022 / Accepted: 23 December 2022 © The Author(s),
under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2023

Abstract Context Treeline-ecotone spatial patterns and their dynamics
reflect underlying processes. Changes in ecotone pattern may reflect
changes in natural drivers or land-use practices. However,
characterizing these dynamics presents a major challenge, limiting our
ability to map, understand and predict changes in the upper limits of
mountain forests. Objective This paper proposes a new method using
multiple pattern dimensions to describe treeline- ecotone spatial
pattern shifts. This standardized pro- tocol should be able to (i)
distinguish different types of treeline-ecotone patterns within a large
study area,

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary
material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10980- 022- 01589-4.

D. Birre (*) · F. Alexandre  Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Pléiade, UR
7338, F-93430 Villetaneuse, France e-mail: deborah.birre@univ-paris13.fr

T. Feuillet  University of Caen, UMR 6266 IDEES CNRS, Caen, France

R. Lagalis  University of Paris Cité, Paris, France

J. Milian  University of Paris 8, UMR LADYSS CNRS, Saint-Denis, France

(ii) characterize temporal pattern shifts in spatial pat- tern between
     two or more dates. Method We mapped alpine treeline ecotones (ATE)
     at 648 sites in the eastern French Pyrenees using aerial images
     from ~ 1955 and ~ 2015, identify- ing forest and non-forest areas
     at the hillslope scale. Extracted patch metrics were summarized
     using a Principle Component Analysis (PCA) and spatial pat- tern
     change was quantified from the shift in the PCA space and compared
     to elevational shifts. Results Three clusters of patterns were
     distin- guished: diffuse, discrete and island-forming ATEs. Between
     1955 and 2015, about half of the sites changed from one pattern
     cluster to another. Shifts into discrete ATEs were associated with
     smaller and negative elevational shifts, while shifts into diffuse

D. Sheeren  University of Toulouse, INRAE, UMR DYNAFOR,
Castanet-Tolosan, France

R. Serrano-Notivoli  University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain

M. Vignal  University of Avignon, UMR 7300 ESPACE CNRS, 74 Rue Louis
Pasteur, 84000 Avignon, France

M. Y. Bader  Faculty of Geography, Ecological Plant Geography,
University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany

Vol.: (0123456789)1 3ATEs coincided with the highest positive
elevational shifts. Conclusion The proposed method allows a stand-
ardized and repeatable quantification of vegetation pattern change in
alpine treeline ecotones based on historical aerial imagery. Seeing the
importance of treeline-ecotone shifts for alpine biodiversity, we
encourage the use of this protocol to better under- stand treeline
dynamics at treelines globally.

Keywords Alpine treeline ecotone · Landscape metrics · Structural
shift · Spatio-temporal PCA · French Pyrenees

Introduction

Vegetation transitions such as treeline ecotones (in mountains and in
subarctic areas) are widely recog- nized as being sensitive to
environmental changes in combination with anthropogenic changes
(e.g. Cama- rero and Gutiérrez 2004; Holtmeier and Broll 2005). This
sensitivity results in ecotonal dynamics that have many implications
(e.g. for biodiversity conserva- tion, ecosystem restoration, and
gravitational hazard management) and that have been evidenced for a long
time (see Holtmeier and Broll 2019 for an historical overview).
Spatio-temporal ecotonal dynamics can manifest in different ways. In
most studies, treeline- ecotone dynamics are characterized by
elevational (or latitudinal) shifts (Ameztegui et  al. 2016; Bonanomi
et  al. 2018; Elliott and Cowell 2015). However, not only the position
but also the spatial pattern of tree- line ecotones is subject to
change. Bader et al. (2021) recently proposed a typology of
treeline-ecotone spa- tial patterns, distinguishing, from a
perpendicular top-down perspective, diffuse, discrete, and island
patterns at the hillslope scale. They pointed out that these different
patterns should reflect underlying pro- cesses (e.g. tree mortality,
environmental heterogene- ity, wind and snow effects or even seed
dispersal) and thus can be used to understand treeline dynamics.

Yet treeline-ecotone spatial patterns or forms can change over time
(e.g. densification or upward scat- tering of treeline ecotone; see
Ameztegui et al. 2021) and recent studies have shown that such changes
in patterns may not be systematically associated with an elevational
shift (Feuillet et  al. 2020; Mor- ley et  al. 2020; Treml and Chuman
2015). Whereas

Landsc Ecol

temperature is the major determinant of the position of the potential
treeline, which will thus shift predict- ably with global warming
(Körner and Paulsen 2004), the spatio-temporal heterogeneity observed in
treeline ecotones implies that climate change alone is not suf- ficient
to predict their dynamics. Clearly, other pro- cesses interact locally
to modulate treeline-ecotone position and dynamics. These
scale-dependent under- lying processes can be revealed by treeline
spatial pat- terns (Bader et al. 2021). As Harsch and Bader (2011) point
out, these spatial patterns could be “a potential key to understanding
treeline dynamics”. Therefore, characterizing treeline-ecotone spatial
patterns and their time-dependent changes is a prerequisite to dis-
entangling the role of different environmental and anthropogenic factors
in treeline-ecotone dynam- ics worldwide (see Holtmeier and Broll 2007
for an overview of the biotic and abiotic factors potentially involved).
However, the quantitative operationaliza- tion of this characterization
presents a major chal- lenge, due to the multi-dimensionality and
regional variability of the spatial patterns found in alpine tree- line
ecotones.

To date, no standard protocol for quantifying the temporal change in
treeline-ecotone spatial pattern has been proposed. The consequent
methodological heterogeneity makes results among studies hard to compare
and may explain some of the inconsisten- cies reported worldwide. The
different methods used include, for example, neighborhood analysis
(Beloiu and Beierkuhnlein 2019; Humphries et  al. 2008; Camarero et 
al. 2015), computation of forest-cover density shifts (Sigdel et 
al. 2020) or landscape met- rics (Ameztegui et  al. 2021; Malandra et 
al. 2019), and visual interpretation (Treml and Veblen 2017).
Landscape—and more specifically treeline eco- tone spatial patterns—can
be described by the config- uration of cover patches, which can be
characterized by aspects such as patch density, shape, complexity, and
the degrees of clumping and connectivity. To highlight spatial pattern
shifts in terms of patch con- figurations, these must therefore be
characterized in a reproducible way, integrating all these aspects.

In this study we propose an easily replicable methodology for
characterizing treeline-ecotone pattern shifts based on patch-based
techniques for quantifying landscape characteristics (Hes- selbarth et 
al. 2019; McGarigal et  al. 2009; Kup- fer 2012). We set out to quantify
treeline ecotone

1 3Vol:. (1234567890) Landsc Ecol

Fig. 1 Graphic summary of the proposed protocol to quan- tify
alpine-treeline ecotone spatial pattern change, applied in the eastern
part of the French Pyrenees with aerial images from ~ 1955 and ~ 2015.
Active individuals (active ind., green dots) refers to patterns (in
plots) used to construct the PCA, i.e. 

those from ~ 1955. Supplementary individuals (supp. ind. pur- ple dots)
refers to patterns for which coordinates are predicted based on the PCA
constructed from active individuals, but who did not contribute to the
PCA building

spatial pattern changes at the hillslope scale, rep- licating sites at a
regional scale, integrating the multiple dimensions of spatial patterns.
To achieve this objective, we characterized treeline spatial pat- terns
and changes in these patterns within a multi- dimensional space. We
aimed to (i) characterize treeline ecotone patterns within a large study
area, (ii) characterize temporal pattern shifts, and (iii) relate
pattern shifts to elevational shifts.

Data and methods

Treeline-shaping ecological processes and their hierarchy could evolve
over time, resulting in changes in spatial patterns or the pathways of
ongoing pattern development. The protocol devel- oped here aims to
evaluate, in a standardized way, changes in alpine treeline ecotone
(ATE) spatial pattern between two dates based on repeat aerial
photography. The protocol is easily replicable, the workflow being
implemented entirely using R

software and open source packages (R core Team, 2022; Hesselbarth et 
al. 2019). Figure  1 graphi- cally sums up the proposed methodological
proto- col described below.

Study area

Analyses were applied to the ATE of the French eastern Pyrenees (Fig. 
2), covering the Pyrénées- Orientales and Ariège departments. The study
area includes some major massifs: the Canigou (2,785  m a.s.l.), Puigmal
(2,910 m a.s.l.), Carlit (2,921 m a.s.l.) and Madrès (2,469  m a.s.l.)
in the Pyrénées-Orien- tales department, and the Trois-Seigneurs (2,199 
m a.s.l.), Montcalm (3,077  m a.s.l.), and Mont Valier (2,838 m a.s.l.)
in the Ariège department. It includes various climatic,
topo-geomorphologic and anthro- pogenic conditions, with for example:
(i) a climate gradient with Mediterranean influence increasing towards
the Pyrénées-Orientales, with a concurrent increase in summer droughts
and decrease in ocean- ity; (ii) lithological variation with crystalline
(e.g.  Canigou and Carlit) and sedimentary (e.g. Puigmal)

1 3Vol.: (0123456789)Landsc Ecol

Fig. 2 Study area location map and sampling design. a Distri- bution of
the sites (n = 648) in the Eastern Pyrenees. Shades of blue and green
indicate 1-km elevational bands from lowland (blue) to > 3000 m
(yellowish green), the dark blue to the east is the Mediterranean Sea.
b  Location and spatial configura- tion of the example sites shown in c
and d. c Historical aerial image showing two plots with the binary
forest/non-forest clas-

sification (~ 1955). d The same sites as in c on recent imagery showing
the respective plots and binary classification (~ 2015). Image source:
BD-ORTHO/BD-ORTHO Histo IGN-f (0.5-m resolution).  Source for a: From
“Contour des departements français issus d’OpenStreetMap”, © the
contributors of Open- StreetMap under license from ODbL (02/01/2018) and
©Euro- Geographics for the administrative boundaries

massifs; and (iii) a more marked abandonment of both the
agro-silvo-patoral system and the extraction of metals in the
Pyrénées-Orientales from the mid- nineteenth century (Milian
et al. 2012; Saulnier et al.  2020; Métailié and Paegelow 2004; Vacquié
2015). Mountain pine (Pinus uncinata Ramond ex. DC.) is the most
prevalent species at the forest upper limit, along with various
deciduous tree species like Fagus sylvatica, mainly in the western part
of the study area (Ariège). Pinus uncinata, which presents an ecologi-
cal optimum in the upper-montane forest, is the main tree species found
at Pyrenean ATE (Feuillet et  al.  2020; Améztegui et  al. 2010;
Cantegrel 2019; Can- tegrel 1986). Since the alpine vegetation is
generally dominated by herbaceous species, the spectral con- trast with
the dark-colored P. uncinata trees is strong and classification of
panchromatic and visible-color aerial imagery was feasible in our study
area.

Data acquisition

Because tree growth and colonization processes tend to be slow in
treeline ecotones, we aimed at covering the longest possible time span
available in aerial photographs for the study area and were lucky to
have high-quality images available already from the 1950s. Spatial
patterns at the upper forest limit in the study area were therefore
delimited from panchromatic historical (1956 and 1953 respec- tively for
Ariège and Pyrénées-Orientales) and recent colored RGB (2016 and 2015
respectively for Ariège and Pyrénées-Orientales) 0.5-m resolution
orthophotographs. These data were provided by the National Institute of
Geographic and Forest Infor- mation - IGN (https:// www. ign. fr/ insti
tut/ ident ity- card). Radiometric pre-processing and ortho-rec-
tification with digital terrain models were carried out by the data
provider (IGN; https:// geose rvices. ign. fr/ docum entat ion/ donne
es/ ortho/ bdort ho). We assessed the spatial fit of the two image dates
by measuring the distance between 144 distinctive

1 3Vol:. (1234567890) Landsc Ecol

Table 1 Accuracy assessment (n = 500) of each classifica- tion performed
on historical (~ 1955) and recent (~ 2015) orthophotographs for each
French departement (Ariège and Pyrénées-Orientales) before visual
control and manual correc-

tion. P_accuracy = Producer accuracy (refers to false negative
segments); U_accuracy = User accuracy (refers to false positive
segments); Kappa = Overall agreement between classified pix- els and
ground truth. 1 = forest area, 0 = non-forest area

Year

Department

P_accuracy

U_accuracy

Kappa

    1955

    2015

Ariège PO Ariège PO

1

0.88 0.72 0.85 0.83

0

0.97 0.99 0.93 0.98

1

0.92 0.86 0.91 0.94

0

0.96 0.97 0.88 0.93

0.87 0.76 0.79 0.83

landscape features (e.g. rocks) on the two overlain images. The average
shift was 2.3 m.

Sampling design

Image classification

For each site, orthophotographs (with a 0.5-m digi- tal resolution) were
first segmented using the seg- ment mean shift algorithm (ArcMap
v.10.5.1) to group contiguous close mean value pixels in the same
segment. A supervised classification based on the random forest
algorithm was then applied to these segmented images using the EnMAP-Box
toolbox (Breiman 2001; Van der Linden et al. 2015; EnMAP- Box
Developers, 2019) based on the scikit-learn Python library (Pedregosa
et al. 2011). Accuracy val- ues were computed based on confusion
matrices from a sample of 500 random points for each year and each
department (Table 1). Historic and recent forest/non- forest binary
classifications were obtained for each site set (Fig. 1).

These classifications were visually checked and manually corrected.
Finally, the classifications were sifted to keep only the forest patches
formed of more than 100 pixels (25  m²). This threshold was deter- mined
visually to exclude the smallest forest patches and small isolated trees
as we work at the resolution of small clusters of trees and to focus
only on the lower part of the ATE (near the timberline). Exclud- ing
these small tree-covered patches has important implications for the
interpretation, as discussed below (“Discussion” section). This
threshold was also deter- mined to exclude artifacts, such as boulders
classified as trees, which were sometimes unavoidable in the
classification of the panchromatic images.

Sets of two (one for each year) rectangular plots (300  m x 200  m,
following the study of Dearborn and Danby 2020) were arranged along the
upper forest limit parallel to the main slope centered on the upper
forest limits visually identify as the tran- sition zone between forest
and alpine grassland of the respective year and spaced about 500  m
apart on the classified orthophotographs. Thus each plot incorporates
approximately 50% forest and 50% grassland so as to be centered on the
ecotone. Each plot was manually arranged by the same operator to control
for sampling bias. A total of 648 plots per year was delineated, 457 in
Ariège and 191 in Pyrénées-Orientales (Fig.  2). Each site was there-
fore described by two (recent and historical) plots, more or less
overlapping depending on the eleva- tional change of the treeline
ecotone between the two dates (Fig. 2).

Spatial pattern characterization by landscape metrics

The ATE spatial pattern was characterized within each rectangular plot
from the computation of land- scape metrics at the class level (forest /
non-forest) using the “landscapemetrics” package (Hesselbarth et 
al. 2019) in the R software (version 4.0.5; R Core Team, 2022). We used
19 landscape metrics (Table  2) in four categories (aggregation, area
and edge, core area, and spatial pattern) to describe the spatial
patterns. Apart from the mean of the metric for each plot, we also
calculated dispersion param- eters (variation coefficient and standard
deviation) for those metrics that were calculated at the patch

1 3Vol.: (0123456789)- t e m e s o h t

r o F

. ) 5 1 0 2

l a g i r a G c M

; 9 1 0 2

. l a

t e

h t r a b l e s s e H

(

e g a k c a p

” s c i r t e m e p a c s d n a l “

e h t

y b

d e d i v o r p

s m h t i r o g l a m o r f

d e t u p m o c

s c i r t e m e p a c s d n a l

e h t

f o

n o i t p i r c s e D

2

e l b a T

f o

t n e i c ffi e o c

e h t

h t o b

g n i r e d i s n o c

, s i s y l a n a A C P

e h t

n i

c i r t e m e t a r a p e s

a

s a

s e h c t a p

n e e w t e b

n o i t a i r a v

e h t

d e s u

o s l a

e w

, h c t a p

r e p

s e u l a v

e h t

f o

n a e m a

s a

d e t u p m o c

e r a

t a h t

s c i r

o t n i

g n i k a t

d e t a l u c l a c

s a w h c i h w

, x e d n i

y t i u g i t n o c

e h t

m o r f

t p e c x e

, s s a l c

t s e r o f

e h t

r o f

y l n o

d e m r o f r e p

e r e w s n o i t a t u p m o c

l a c i t s i t a t S

. ) d s (

n o i t a i v e d

d r a d n a t s

e h t

d n a

) v c (

n o i t a i r a v

n o i t a g e r g g A

y r o g e t a C

n o i t a g e r g g A

n o i t a g e r g g A

s t i n U

%

/

/

. d e t a g e r g g a s i d

s l e x i p s s a l c - e m a s

: 1 −

y l m o d n a r

s l e x i p

s s a l c - e m a s

:

0

. s l e x i p

s s a l c - e m a s

f o

. d e t a g e r g g a

s l e x i p

s s a l c - e m a s

: 1

. d e g n a r r a

s e u l a V

n o i t p i r c s e D

n o i t a i v e r b b A

e g a k c a p

n i

e m a N

] 0 0 1 – 0 [

. s r i a p

r o b h g i e n s s a l c - e m a s

f o

t n e c r e P

i

A

n o i t a g e r g g A

s l e x i p s r o b h g i e n s s a l c - e m a s

:

0 0 1

. d e t a g e r g g a

y l l a m i x a m

x e d n i

] 1 – 1 −

[

n o i t u b i r t s i d m o d n a r

a m o r f

n o i t a i v e D

y p m u l C

x e d n i

s s e n i p m u l C

s l e x i p

t s e r o f - n o n

d n a

t s e r o f

t n u o c c a

] 0 0 1 – 0 [

s s a l c - e m a s

g n o l a

r e t e m

i r e p

h c t a P

n o i s e h o c

n o i s e h o c

h c t a P

-   i x a m

f o

e g a t n e c r e p

s a

s r o b h g i e n

. r e t e m

i r e p

h c t a p m u m

s s a l c - e m a s

l l a

: 0 0 1

, d e d i v i d b u s

d n a

d e t a g e r g g a s i d

s l e x i p

s s a l c - e m a s

: 0

. d e t c e n n o c

s l e x i p

x e d n i

Landsc Ecol

n o i t a g e r g g A

a h

0 0 1 /

s e h c t a p

0 >

a e r a

r e p s e h c t a p

f o

r e b m u N

n o i t a g e r g g A

/

] s l e x i p

e p a c s d n a l

l a t o t

; 1 [

-   d i v i d

y b

d e n i a t b o s e h c t a p

f o

r e b m u N

t i l p s

d p

x e d n i

g n i t t i l p S

y t i s n e d

h c t a P

s s a l c

e m a s

e h t

f o s e h c t a p

e h t

g n i

e z i s

e m a s

e h t

f o s e h c t a p

o t n i

a e r a

h c t a p s s a l c - e m a s

h t i

w s e s a e r c n I

. n o i s i v i d

e p a c s d n a l

d n a

n o i t c u d e r

h c t a p

e n O

: 1

e g d e

d n a

a e r a

e g d e

d n a

a e r a

a h

a H

. s s a l c

e m a s

0 >

0 >

e h t

f o s e h c t a p

l l a

f o

a e r a

e h t

f o m u S

. a e r a

h c t a p

s s a l c - e m a s

n a e

M

a e r a

. a c

a e r a

s s a l c

l a t o T

a e r a

h c t a P

n o i t a g e r g g A

y t i l i b a b o r P

]

1 – 0 [

y l m o d n a r

s l e x i p

o w

t

t a h t

y t i l i b a b o r P

n o i s i v i D

x e d n i

n o i s i v i D

n o i t a g e r g g A

/

] 1 – 0 [

s s a l c - e m a s

f o

h t g n e l

e g d e - h c t a p

l a t o T

d n a m u m i n i m e h t

o t

d e l a c s e r

s l e x i p

h t g n e l

h c t a p s s a l c - e m a s m u m i x a m

e l g n i s

a

y b

d e t u t i t s n o c

s i

e p a c s d n a l

  ---
  g a
  s i
  d

  y l
  l a
  m i
  x a
  m s
  i

  e p
  a c
  s d
  n a
  l

  : 1

  h c
  t a
  p

  e r
  a u
  q s

  . e
  l b
  i s
  s o
  p

  d e
  t a
  g e
  r g

  . h
  c t
  a p

  e m
  a s

  e h
  t

  n i

  t o
  n

  e r
  a

  d e
  t c
  e l
  e s

  s e
  h c
  t a
  p

  l e
  x i
  p
  ---

  : 0

1

y l n O

h c t a p

g i b

e n O

: 0

: 1

i s l N

d e z i l a m r o N

e p a h s

e p a c s d n a l

x e d n i

1 3Vol:. (1234567890)

 

 

 

 

Landsc Ecol

e g d e

d n a

a e r a

a h

/

m

0 ≥

n i (

h t g n e l

e g d e

h c t a p

e h t

f o m u S

d e

y t i s n e d

e g d E

y r o g e t a C

s t i n U

s e u l a V

n o i t p i r c s e D

n o i t a i v e r b b A

e g a k c a p

n i

e m a N

) d e u n i t n o c (

2

e l b a T

e g d e

d n a

a e r a

e g d e

d n a

a e r a

e g d e

d n a

a e r a

e g d e

d n a

a e r a

a e r a

e r o c

a e r a

e r o c

a e r a

e r o c

e p a h S

m

%

%

m

%

a h

a h

/

n o i t c a r f

a

s a

s w o d n i w

l e x i p - 3 × 3

a

r o f

. e . i

, e u l a v m u m i x a m e h t

f o

. s s a l c

e n o

f o

e p a c s d n a l

l a c i t r e v

d n a

l a t n o z i r o h

, s s a l c

e h t

s t e s

d n a

1

s a

s t n u o c

l e x i p

l a r t n e C

t n u o c

s s a l c

e m a s

e h t

f o

s r u o b h g i e n

s l e x i p s s a l c - e m a s

l a n o g a i d

d n a

2

s a

e r a

s l e x i p

d n u o r g k c a B

. 1

. 0

s a

s a

t n u o c

t n u o c

e h t

r e v o s s a l c

e m a s

e h t

f o

) r e t e m

. ) s e r a t c e h

n i (

a e r a

s s a l c

l a t o t

] 0 0 1 - 0 [

e h t

n i

d e d u l c n i

e p a c s d n a l

f o

t n e c r e P

i p l

h c t a p

t s e g r a L

0 ≥

l e x i p

h c a e

n e e w t e b e c n a t s i d

n a e

M

e t a r y g

-   a r y g

f o

s u i d a R

. h c t a p s t i

f o

d i o r t n e c

e h t

d n a

n o i t

. t n e c r e p

n i

d e t r e v n o c

a e r a

e p a c s d n a l

] 0 0 1 - 0 [

l a t o t

r e v o

a e r a

s e h c t a p

l l a

f o

n o i t i d d A

d n a l p

. h c t a p

t s e g r a l

f o

e g a t n e c r e P

e p a c s d n a l

x e d n i

0 ≥

e h t

f o

s e h c t a p

l l a

f o

h t g n e l

e g d E

e t

e g d e

l a t o T

. s s a l c

e m a s

] 0 0 1 – 0 [

h c t a p

h c a e

f o

e g a t n e c r e p

e h t

f o

n a e

M

i a c

x e d n i

a e r a

e r o C

0 ≥

0 ≥

] 1 ; 0 [

e v a h

t a h t

s l e x i p

. e . i

, a e r a

e r o c

n i

. s s a l c

e m a s

e h t

n i

s r o b h g i e n y l n o

h c t a p

h c a e

n i h t i

w a e r a

l a r t n e c

n a e

M

t o l p

e h t

n i h t i

w a e r a

l a r t n e c

l a t o T

e r o c

a c t

a e r a

e r o c

l a t o T

a e r a

e r o C

n i

s e u l a v

y t i u g i t n o c

f o m u S

g i t n o c

x e d n i

y t i u g i t n o C

e p a h S

/

1 ≥

a

o t

d e r a p m o c (

y t i x e l p m o c

e p a h S

e p a h s

x e d n i

e p a h S

) e r a u q s

1 3Vol.: (0123456789)

 

level, to quantify heterogeneity within each plot. This resulted in a
total of 33 (19 + 14) metrics that were included in the principal
component analysis (PCA; see below).

Information reduction by PCA

A reduction of the information by principal compo- nent analysis (PCA)
was carried out based on the metrics calculated for the historical
ecotone plots, while adding recent ecotones as supplementary individuals
(note that in factor analysis, supplemen- tary individuals do not
contribute to the component building but do have factorial coordinates
and can then be positioned in the factorial spaces). This first step
thus allowed to synthesize with a reduced num- ber of variables (the
so-called principal components) the information contained in the initial
33 variables. This analysis served as a basis for clustering plots in
groups with similar characteristics, for quantifying profiles of pattern
change, as described below, and for identifying the dominant dimensions
distinguish- ing spatial patterns in our study area. The number of PCA
dimensions for subsequent analysis was cho- sen based on three main
constraints: PCA eigenval- ues; explained variance; and multifactorial
analysis interpretability. The PCA was performed using the FactoMineR R
package (Le et  al. 2008) and visual- ized using the Factoextra R
package (Kassambara and Mundt 2020).

Clustering and qualitative assessment of spatial pattern change

A hierarchical classification on principal components (HCPC) of
historical ecotones was performed, also using the FactoMineR R package
(Le et  al. 2008). Since a HCPC based on the first four principal com-
ponents showed that the first two components pro- vided an almost
perfect distinction of the clusters, we then used only the two first
principal components to build clusters, facilitating visualization and
the com- parison between the years. The number of clusters was derived
from the tree partition that maximized the relative loss of
within-cluster inertia. The facto- rial plane was then divided into
subspaces corre- sponding to the cluster map based on a Voronoi tes-
sellation with an aggregation of polygons per cluster (Fig. 4). Recent
ecotones were then projected in these

Landsc Ecol

cluster-based subspaces in order to count the shifts of ecotones from
one cluster to another. The “v.test” sta- tistics (Escofier and Pagès
2008; Feuillet et al. 2012) was used to describe what patch metrics
differ signifi- cantly between the clusters and thus define them. The
resulting clusters were associated with the pattern typology described
by Bader et  al. (2021) and pre- sented graphically by the most
representative ecotone plots, i.e. those located closest to the centroid
of the cluster. Shifts between clusters, i.e. from one treeline- ecotone
type to another, between the two dates were recorded as a qualitative
measure of pattern change.

Quantitative assessment of spatial pattern change

Changes in pattern between the two dates were quan- tified through a
spatio-temporal PCA (Cossart et  al.  2020). The patch metrics of the
recent plots were pro- jected onto the factorial plane defined by the
histori- cal metrics, and coordinates on the first and second axes were
then extracted for each site both for the historical and the recent
plot. The distance between these pairs of plots was calculated from
these coor- dinates. This distance then defined the degree of change in
the ecotone spatial pattern within each site: the greater the distance,
the more the ecotone pattern had shifted. Additionally, we calculated a
directional pattern shift by extracting the absolute shift along the
first PCA axis, along which the three pattern types were most strongly
distinguished. Here, positive dis- tances indicated a shift towards more
diffuse and neg- ative distances a shift towards more discrete treeline-
ecotone types.

Characterization of elevational shift and comparison with pattern shift

Elevational shift was determined using a digital elevation model (1  m
in resolution, provided by the National Institute of Geographic and
Forest Information - IGN) by computing the difference in elevation of
the five highest forest pixels at the two dates following the method
developed in Feuillet et al. (2020), based on the two previously
described supervised classifications. The relationship between spatial
pattern change and elevational shifts was then determined by performing
bivariate descriptive analyses. Correlations (Kendall rank correlation

1 3Vol:. (1234567890) Landsc Ecol

Fig. 3 Correlation of the landscape metrics describ- ing 648 alpine
treeline- ecotone sites in the French Pyrenees with the first two PCA
axes based on the his- torical (~1955) landscape metrics. The length and
color of the arrows indicate their contribution in percent to the
construction of the two main dimensions (see color scale). See table 2
for abbreviations

coefficients) were estimated to evaluate the associa- tion between
quantifications of the spatial patterns change (distance in factorial
plane) and the eleva- tional treeline shift. Finally, LOESS regression
was estimated for testing the ability to predict quantita- tive spatial
pattern change based on the elevational shift indicator.

The differences in elevational shift between groups of sites with
qualitatively different spa- tial pattern shifts was determined by
performing Kruskall-Wallis tests. Finally, a pairwise compari- son
Tukey’s test was performed to identify signifi- cant differences between
the treeline-ecotone plot clusters.

Results

Descriptive statistics

The two sets of 648 plots were located at an aver- age of 1850 and 1885 
m a.s.l. for plots centered on historic and recent treelines,
respectively. The

elevational change in ATE position, as defined by the five uppermost
forest pixels, was 39.4  m on average across the entire study area with
a range from − 212.0 m to + 307.8 m.

Information reduction by PCA

The first four PCA axes had eigenvalues of 14.2, 6.0, 3.2 and 2.0. The
first and second axes accounted for 65.2% of the total variance with
respectively 45.8% and 19.4% (Fig. 3), while the third and fourth
accounted for respectively 10.4% and 6.6%. Due to the strong reduction
in information between the first two and the third and fourth
dimensions, we selected only the first two dimensions for subsequent
analyses. The first PCA axis reflects 13 area and edge, shape, core area
and aggregation metrics, which contribute more than 70% to its
construction. Among these metrics, 11 are strongly positively correlated
with it (r > 0.75; p < 0.05) and two are negatively correlated with it
(r < − 0.75; p < 0.05; Table  S1). Thus, an increase in this first
dimen- sion is associated with an increase in total core area (“tca”),
core area (“ca”), percentage of landscape

1 3Vol.: (0123456789)Landsc Ecol

Fig. 4 a  Clusters of treeline-ecotone plots based on a hierar- chical
classification in a PCA-space based on patch metrics from historical
(~1955) aerial imagery. b  Subdivision of the factorial plane into
subspaces based on a Voronoi tessellation and assignment of each polygon
to the cluster map. c  Recent

(~2015; red dots) plots projected on the historical cluster-based
subspaces and comparison with  historical treeline-ecotone (black dots).
Cluster 1 (blue) = diffuse, cluster 2 (yellow) = island and cluster 3
(grey) = discrete treeline ecotone

Fig. 5 Identification of the variables significantly (p < 0.05)
associated with each historical (~ 1955) treeline-ecotone clusters. No
dot is shown for non- significant associations. Positive and negative
v.test values indicate high and low metrics values respectively,
i.e. those that are over- or under-repre- sented within each cluster.
Colors indicate the general category of the metric. See Table 2 for
abbreviations of the metrics

(“pland”), largest patch area (“lpi”), variability of radius of gyration
(“gyrate_sd” and “gyrate_cv”), core (core_sd), total area (area_sd),
aggrega- tion, cohesion and clumpiness (“clumpy”), and a decrease of
division index (“division”) and normal- ized landscape shape index
(“nlsi”). This dimension thus describes the aggregation level and the
size of the patches forming the forest landscape with posi- tive values
indicating ecotones with few large and aggregated patches, and negative
values indicating many dispersed small patches.

For the second component, the six most corre- lated metrics (r > |0.75|;
p < 0.05; Table S1) contrib- ute more than 65% to its formation. An
increase in this second dimension is associated with an increase of
contiguity and core area indices (“contig_cv”,

“contig_sd”, “cai_cv” and “cai_sd”) and a decrease in the average of
these indexes (“contig_mn” and “cai “mn”). This dimension thus describes
the level of connectedness within the ecotone. Positive values in this
dimension are associated with ecotones formed by heterogeneous
connections between small patches and negative values with
well-connected and large patches.

Clustering of historical and recent treeline ecotone plots

Three clusters were distinguished, and these sepa- rated out most
strongly along the first PCA axis. The first cluster is located to the
left, the second cluster in the middle towards the top (high values on
the second

1 3Vol:. (1234567890) Cluster 1 (Diffuse)

Cluster 2 (Island)

Cluster 3 (Discrete)

Landsc Ecol

Fig. 6 Treeline-ecotone plots closest to the center of each cluster, as
defined on the first two PCA axes based on landscape metrics of forest
cover, for historical (~ 1955) treeline ecotones in the French Pyrenees

Historical

classification (black =

forest pixels)

Historical

orthophotography

axis), and the third one to the bottom right (Fig.  4, Table S2).

Characterization of the clusters

The majority of the patch metrics differ between the three clusters
(Fig.  5). The three historical (~ 1955) clusters made it possible to
distinguish three types of forest treeline-ecotone plots: diffuse,
island and dis- crete (Fig. 6). These were characterized by an aggre-
gation and increasing patch size, and a decrease in the number of
patches from diffuse to discrete, through island. The transition between
the forest below and non-forest vegetation above became increasingly
distinct from cluster 1 to cluster 3, as illustrated in Fig. 6. These
terms are based on the terminology sug- gested in Bader et  al. (2021),
although we apply the term “diffuse” more broadly, including patterns
with small patches rather than just those with spreading single trees.

Profiles of change

The distance calculated between recent and histori- cal plot coordinates
projected in the historical PCA (Fig. 4c) constitutes the change in the
spatial pattern of the treeline-ecotone site at the two dates. Thus, the
greater the distance between two points of a plot pair, the greater the
change in spatial pattern has been.

Of the 648 ecotone sites, 52% (n = 337) experi- enced changes in spatial
patterns between ~ 1955 and ~ 2015: changing clusters from diffuse to
island or discrete (n = 163), from island to diffuse or dis- crete (n =
125), or from discrete to diffuse or island (n = 49). The average
distance between the treeline- ecotone plots of 1955 and 2015 in the
factorial plane is 5.0, with a range from 0.3 to 16.8.

Overall, there was a shift towards more dis- crete patterns, with the
number of diffuse treelines decreasing and the number of island and
discrete treelines increasing over time (with 333, 220 and 95 plots in
1955, and 240, 262 and 146 plots in 2015, respectively for cluster 1, 2
and 3; Table  S2). More than half of the 333 plots with a diffuse
spatial pat- tern in ~ 1955 remained in this cluster in 2015 (51%, n =
170), while 40% (n = 134) evolved into an island form and 9% (n = 29)
evolved towards a discrete form (Fig.  7). Of the 220 plots with an
island spa- tial pattern, 43% (n = 95) remained in this cluster in 2015,
25% (n = 54) shifted to a diffuse form and 32% (n = 71) to a discrete
form. Of the 95 plots with a dis- crete spatial pattern, 48% remained in
this cluster in 2015 (n = 46), 35% shifted to an island form (n = 33)
and 17% to a diffuse form (n = 16). As expected, the shifts in the
factorial plane were smallest for the sites not changing cluster and
largest for the sites changing between cluster 1 and 3 or vice versa
(Fig. 7).

1 3Vol.: (0123456789)Landsc Ecol

Fig. 7 Number of Pyrenean treeline-ecotone sites (in color) changing
from one ecotone type to another between ~1955 and ~2015 (total n = 648
sites), and the average distance moved in the PCA plane by this groups,
shown as numbers (unitless)

Fig. 8 a  LOESS regression of pattern change against eleva- tional
shift. Pattern change is defined as the distance between historical
(~1955) and recent (~2015) landscape metrics in the historical factorial
PCA plane, irrespective of the direction of change. Kendall’s tau is
indicated at the top left. n.s: non- significant. The colors of the
points correspond to the pattern

type in year. b  Comparison of elevational shifts between dif- ferent
pattern transitions between historical (~1955) and recent (~2015)
ecotones in the historical factorial plane. Black points indicate the
means. The dotted red line refers to the overall mean.

Comparison between pattern shifts and elevational shift

The Kendall correlation between elevational shifts and extent of the
spatial pattern changes was not sig- nificant (p = 0.9) and the LOESS
regression indicated the absence of any relationship between elevational
shifts and the distance of pattern shift in the PCA plane (Fig.  8a).
This result indicates that elevational shifts can take place without
large shifts in the pat- tern and vice versa. However, these two types
of shifts are not independent, which becomes clear

when considering the quality of the pattern shift rather than just the
distance. Shifts into discrete ATE types tended to coincide with small
or downward elevational shifts, while changes into diffuse ATE types
coincided with larger upward elevational shifts (Fig. 8b). Directional
change along the first PCA axis showed a negative correlation with
elevational shift (Pearson r = −  0.23, p < 0.05). This confirms that
ATE becoming more diffuse had a larger upward shift while those becoming
more discrete moved the least or downward in elevation.

1 3Vol:. (1234567890) Landsc Ecol

Fig. 9 Violin plots comparing different treeline-ecotone spa- tial types
according to a clustering of landscape metrics, either historical ~1955
(a and c) or recent ~2015 (b and d) in terms of spatial pattern shifts
(a and b), elevational shifts (c and d), or recent elevation (e). f
Violin plots comparing the recent ele-

vation of ecotones at which different transitions between tree-
line-ecotone spatial types have taken place. Black points refer to
average values. Dashed red line corresponds to the mean of all sites.
Pairwise p-values (in a–d) are based Tukey’s pairwise comparison tests

The observed elevational and pattern change dif- fered between the
clusters, i.e. between ecotone spatial types. Historically as well as,
more clearly, recently diffuse patterns changed the least in terms of
the pattern metrics (Fig.  9a and b), although overall their elevational
change was similar to that of the other forms (Fig.  9c and d). They
were situ- ated at the highest elevation compared to the other spatial
patterns (Fig.  9e and f). Those ecotones that were already diffuse in
1955 and remained diffuse until 2015 were located at the highest
elevations of all, while most ecotones that transitioned from being
diffuse to discrete were situated at lower elevations, similar to
ecotones that were discrete already in 1955 (Fig. 9f).

Discussion

The new method used demonstrated that the studied alpine-treeline
ecotones showed variable and partly strong shifts in their spatial
pattern, and that these shifts were not necessarily accompanied by a
strong elevational shift. Likewise, strong elevational shifts

(up to 200 m upwards or 100 m downwards) not nec- essarily implied
strong changes in the spatial pattern, as also suggested by Feuillet et 
al. (2020) based on forest cover density as a proxy of spatial pattern.
So the intensity of the change was not correlated, but the directions of
the shifts were clearly related: shifts towards discrete ecotones were
associated with small or downwards elevational shifts while shifts
towards diffuse patterns were associated with the largest upwards
shifts. These associations align with theo- retical predictions, since
discrete treelines, especially when also abrupt (i.e. an abrupt change
in vegetation height from tallish trees to low-stature alpine vegeta-
tion; in contrast to discreteness, which refers only to the change in
forest cover, as seen from above) are thought to be caused by
disturbances (i.e. mortal- ity above but not inside the ecotone1), while
diffuse

1 Mortality outside the ecotone or outside of existing forest patches
could also be due to shade dependence or frost sensi- tivity of treeline
tree species, i.e. stress rather than disturbance (Bader et al. 2021).
However, in our study area all treeline eco- tones were composed of P.
uncinata, and climatic gradients were mild, so that different patterns
were unlikely caused by such species-specific sensitivities and more
likely by distur- bance history.

1 3Vol.: (0123456789)treelines may indicate an active colonization by
trees of the alpine zone (Bader et al. 2021).

Since treeline elevational shift and pattern shift are not necessarily
correlated (as shown here and previ- ously in Feuillet et  al. 2020),
but pattern shifts can have important consequences for ecosystem
function- ing in the treeline ecotone, quantifying directional pattern
change is important. As shown here, a reduc- tion of the information
held in different pattern met- rics via PCA can be a useful way of
identifying the main dimensions of spatial pattern and defining the
direction of pattern change. In contrast to most pre- vious studies on
treeline-ecotone change, which have focused mainly on infilling
processes, quantified as increases in tree cover or density within the
ecotone (e.g. Treml and Chuman 2015; Batllori et  al. 2010), our method
explicitly uses landscape metrics that describe ecologically meaningful
pattern properties like clumping, connectivity and core-edge ratios. On
the one hand, these patterns describe the landscape available to
e.g. animals and establishing plants. On the other hand, just like point
patterns based on elab- orate field sampling of tree locations
(e.g. Batllori et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2016; Camarero et al. 2000),
they indicate which processes are acting to form and perhaps shift the
treeline ecotone (Bader et al. 2021).

Since the PCA is sensitive to the metrics included, with both the
variability within metrics and the number of correlated metrics
describing certain pat- tern dimensions (e.g. connectivity) determining
the principal components, the array of metrics included needs to be
determined with care. For specific ques- tions about ecotone pattern
change, metrics could be considered individually or in tailored
combinations (e.g. if connectivity of either forest or alpine habitats
for animal movement within the ecotone is of inter- est). Likewise, such
specific studies could deter- mine cluster boundaries and define
clusters (ecotone types) based on specific criteria taking into account
functional properties of these metrics. However, for more general and
explorative studies like the one pre- sented here, the use of the full
array of pattern dimen- sions, reduced to manageable dimensions allowing
the interpretation of shift directions by PCA, holds the advantage of
capturing a maximum of informa- tion about the patterns, reducing the
risk of missing subtle changes. Likewise, the statistical approach to
defining clusters used avoids subjective decisions on cluster boundaries
and is suitable to describe change

Landsc Ecol

trends. Until the scientific community agrees on the quantitative
criteria for defining treeline-ecotone spa- tial types, such a
statistical approach is the best we can do.

Since the contrast between the P. uncinata cano- pies and the soil and
vegetation background in our study area was strong, it was possible to
identify trees even on panchromatic aerial imagery from the 1950s.
However, even under these favorable condi- tions, and even on the more
modern multispectral images, an automated identification of single
trees, especially smaller trees as found towards the tree- line, is
challenging at best on imagery with a 0.5-m resolution. To avoid
spurious results, we decided to exclude the smallest segments, which may
represent single trees but also rocks and their shadows, espe- cially on
the panchromatic images. As a result, the diffuseness and possibly the
elevational advance of the studied treeline ecotones were probably
underesti- mated. This does not invalidate the method, however, which
can also be applied in cases where single trees can be identified
unequivocally thanks to very-high resolution spectral imagery and/or the
additional use of Lidar data to allow a clearer demarcation of tree
cover. If sizes of individual trees can be derived, e.g.  from Lidar
data (e.g. Coops et al. 2013) or by corre- lating horizontal canopy
sizes or shade lengths (Dial et  al. 2022) to tree height, we recommend
including additional metrics describing the treeline ecotone in three
dimensions, such as the height of the uppermost trees, the rate of
height change with elevation, and the distribution of height-to-width
ratios of the trees (to detect Krummholz forms). In most cases, such
met- rics will not be available for historical ecotones, and the spatial
resolution may not allow the same level of detail as for recent images.
Since for detecting change the same resolution should be used for
historical and recent data, the historical data set the standard.
However, additionally having access to more detailed metrics for recent
ecotones is useful both for future change detection and for better
understanding the pro- cesses that have led to the recent pattern. For
exam- ple, whether advancing trees are stunted to Krum- mholz tells us
whether they suffer from dieback, e.g.  due to strong winds or frost
desiccation, which would limit further advance. And whether a stable
dis- crete treeline is composed of tall trees or not tells us whether
these trees are growth limited or not – if they

1 3Vol:. (1234567890) Landsc Ecol

are not, disturbance is likely maintaining the discrete form.

Our treeline ecotones were relatively simple to work with, not only
because the trees were easily dis- tinguished, but also because they are
composed on a single dominant tree species among herbs and small shrubs.
This contrasts strongly with e.g. tropical tree- line ecotones, where
species richness of trees and tall shrubs can be very high and although
many ecotones are very abrupt and discrete, those that are not tend to
show no clear binary distinction between forest and alpine vegetation
due to the presence of tall shrub vegetation (e.g. Bader et  al. 2007;
Hofstede et  al.  2014).This does not preclude the use of the proposed
methodology though. More complex vegetation pat- terns (i.e. with more
than two classes) may also be quantified by landscape metrics. Although
this remains to be tested, we expect that these can then be used to
distinguish pattern types and to detect pattern shifts in the same way
as described here.

We developed the method with this case study based on images from two
dates 60 years apart. Shorter and multiple time intervals would have
allowed a finer matching of changes to potential driv- ers, especially
for changes due to disturbances. How- ever, we consider that generally
for alpine treelines, where processes tend to be slow (disturbance is
fast but the resulting patterns will last until dispersal and growth
have permitted a recolonization by trees), this long time period is
suitable to describe change, if only two dates area going to be
compared. On the other hand, the method could also be applied to other
spatial objects for which spatial pattern shifts may be much faster,
such as urban sprawl patterns, urban eco- system services (Schwarz 2010;
Grafius et al. 2018), the effects of natural disaster  such as typhoons
on landscapes (Lin et  al. 2006), or ecological connec- tivity (Herrera
et al. 2018). In such cases data points should clearly be chosen at
shorter time intervals. Analyzing more than two points in time can be
done, as long as data are available and can be processed, using the same
methodology  and is useful to refine the description and interpretation
of spatial pattern shifts.

The fact that diffuse treelines occurred at higher elevations than
discrete ones and that ecotones chang- ing from diffuse to abrupt ended
up located at much lower elevations than those remaining diffuse, sug-
gests that the discrete ecotones were, in the majority

of cases, formed by the removal of forest patches, likely by
disturbances. In addition, (re)colonization of the area above the closed
forest is either not yet com- pleted (trees being smaller than our lower
size thresh- old) or hindered completely by repeated disturbances,
either natural or anthropogenic, or limitations to seedling
establishment imposed by the substrate (e.g.  a lack of soil). For some
tree species, shade-depend- ence or sensitivity to frost at the
seedlings stage may also limit tree establishment outside the protec-
tion of forest (this mechanism probably explains the maintenance of
discrete abrupt treelines in southern- hemisphere treelines composed by
Nothofagaceae, Wardle 2008). Although such a mechanism may play a role
for the beech (Fagus sylvatica) treelines in the western part of our
study area, it cannot explain the variety of patterns observed in the
eastern part of the study area, where one single tree species, Pinus
unci- nata, composed all the ecotones. Although our results cannot
exclude the possibility that the more diffuse forms are also shaped by
disturbances, especially land use practices like cutting and grazing, it
appears that in the Eastern Pyrenees, the more diffuse treelines
represent the least disturbed.

Interestingly, the spatial pattern appeared to have only a weak
predictive value for future elevational or pattern shifts, while it
reflected past pattern shifts but not elevational shifts within the last
60 years. This may appear to contradict theoretical expecta- tions,
where diffuse treelines are predicted to be more dynamic and more
responsive to climate change than discrete treelines (Bader et 
al. 2021). However, this prediction holds only if the processes leading
to cer- tain treeline forms are not changed. If patterns are caused by
disturbance (e.g. due to human land-use), as is often (though not
always) the case with abrupt discrete treelines, and this disturbance
stops, then the dynamics will change (in this case, trees will likely
colonize the space above the closed forest) and the pattern loses
predictive power. Also, in treeline eco- tones that are all composed of
the same tree species (like in the eastern part of our study area), the
spatial patterns are less likely to reflect fundamentally dif- ferent
ecological processes between sites, but rather reflect disturbance
history. Disturbances are predict- able only to a small extent. Lastly,
excluding the smaller single trees from the classification and pat- tern
descriptions prevented the detection of recent colonization patterns,
important indicators of ongoing

1 3Vol.: (0123456789)shifts in pattern and elevation. Thereby “recent”
can sometimes comprise even the 60 years covered by this study, since
trees tend to grow very slowly when approaching treeline. As mentioned
above, a higher resolution of aerial imagery and auxiliary spatial data
could at least partially lift this limitation.

As demonstrated, our protocol can be applied to characterize spatial
pattern changes at the regional scale. However, it presents a limitation
inherent to geomatics, for our analysis allows us to characterize
treeline-ecotone pattern change only in a two-dimen- sional (2D) way, as
seen from above. Thus, some treeline-ecotone characteristics remain
invisible from this viewpoint and at this scale (e.g. tree dimensions,
species composition, age and growth form), whereas a field survey could
reveal them (Treml and Veblen 2017; Camarero et al. 2000, 2004).
Conversely, a field survey does not allow as many sites to be compared
as a remote-sensing-based analysis does. In order to articulate the
advantages of both approaches, we advise first carrying out a geomatic
analysis and then a field survey, for a detailed study of a subset of
sites. This dual work (geomatic and field) thus allows one to target
sites that are often difficult to access, and to carry out a
representative sampling of the diversity of spatial pattern change.

Conclusion

The study of treeline-ecotone spatial patterns is key to understanding
the underlying mechanisms at work, in order to disentangle the multiple
interac- tions associated with its dynamics. A first step con- sists in
characterizing the spatial patterns and their temporal change. However,
as spatial pattern change is understudied compared to elevational shift,
no standardized methodology has been proposed so far. The methodology
presented here takes into account the multidimensional nature of
spatial  patterns. Our change analysis emphasizes the variety in the
evolu- tion of treeline-ecotone spatial patterns. This suggests a
variety of associated underlying processes, and thus the importance of
capturing spatial pattern tempo- ral shifts when analyzing
treeline-ecotone dynamics. Finally, to interpret the observed changes in
spatial pattern, we recommend exploring spatial associations between
these changes and  potential drivers (e.g. 

Landsc Ecol

climate and anthropogenic land use change, topo- geomorphology).
Combined with such  an analysis, the methodology presented here allows
another step forward in understanding what drives the dynam- ics of
alpine treeline ecotones and how mountain ecosystems will respond to
global change in all its multiplicity.

Acknowledgements This study was funded by the National Research Agency
(ANR SpatialTreeP - https:// anr. fr/ Projet- ANR- 21- CE03- 0002)
coordinated by Thierry Feuillet. We also benefited from the support of
University of Paris 13 and the Pléiade laboratory.

Funding The authors have not disclosed any funding.

Declarations

Conflict of interest The authors have not disclosed any con- flict of
interests.

References

Ameztegui A, Brotons L, Coll L (2010) Land use changes as major drivers
of mountain pine (Pinus uncinata Ram.) Expansion in the Pyrenees. Glob
Ecol Biogeogr 19(5):632–641

Ameztegui A, Coll L, Brotons L, Ninot JM (2016) Land use legacies rather
than climate change are driving the recent upward shift of the mountain
tree line in the Pyrenees. Glob Ecol Biogeogr 25(3):263–273

Ameztegui A, Morán-Ordóñez A, Márquez A, Blázquez-Cas- ado Á, Pla M,
Villero D et al (2021) Forest expansion in mountain protected areas:
trends and consequences for the landscape. Landsc Urban Plann 216:104240

Bader MY, Rietkerk M, Bregt AK (2007) Vegetation structure and
temperature regimes of tropical alpine treelines. Arct Antarct Alp Res
39(3):353–364

Bader MY, Llambí LD, Case BS, Buckley HL, Toivonen JM, Camarero JJ et al
(2021) A global framework for linking alpine-treeline ecotone patterns
to underlying processes. Ecography 44(2):265–292

Batllori E, Camarero JJ, Gutiérrez E (2010) Current regenera- tion
patterns at the tree line in the Pyrenees indicate simi- lar recruitment
processes irrespective of the past distur- bance regime. J Biogeogr
37(10):1938–1950

Beloiu M, Beierkuhnlein C (2019) Differences in the spatial structure of
two Pinus cembra L. populations in the Car- pathian Mountains. Forests
10(4):326

Bonanomi G, Rita A, Allevato E, Cesarano G, Saulino L, Di Pasquale G et 
al (2018) Anthropogenic and environmen- tal factors affect the tree line
position of Fagus sylvatica along the Apennines (Italy). J Biogeogr
45(11):2595–2608

Breiman L (2001) Random forests. Mach Learn 45(1):5–32 Camarero JJ,
Gutiérrez E (2004) Pace and pattern of recent treeline dynamics:
response of ecotones to climatic vari- ability in the spanish Pyrenees.
Clim Change 63:181–200

1 3Vol:. (1234567890) Landsc Ecol

Camarero JJ, Gutiérrez E, Fortin MJ (2000) Spatial pattern of subalpine
forest-alpine grassland ecotones in the Spanish Central Pyrenees. For
Ecol Manag 134(1–3):1–16

Camarero JJ, García-Ruiz JM, Sangüesa-Barreda G, Galván JD, Alla AQ,
Sanjuán Y et  al (2015) Recent and intense dynamics in a formerly static
Pyrenean treeline. Arct Ant- arct Alp Res 47(4):773–783

Cantegrel R (1986) Seuils écologiques et organisation biologique des
pineraies alticoles de Pinus uncinata Ram: nouvelles perspectives en
Néouvielle (Pyrénées occidentales)  Bulletin de la Société Botanique de
France. Actualités Botaniques. 133(1):193–208

Cantegrel R (2019) De l’origine des Pins de montagne euro-

péens. Revue forestière française 71(3):249–268

Coops NC, Morsdorf F, Schaepman ME, Zimmermann NE (2013)
Characterization of an alpine tree line using air- borne LiDAR data and
physiological modeling. Glob Change Biol 19(12):3808–3821

Cossart E, Pic J, Le Guen Y, Fressard M (2020) Spatial pat- terns of
vineyard abandonment and related land use transi- tions in Beaujolais
(France): a multiscale approach. Sus- tainability 12(11):4695

Dearborn KD, Danby RK (2020) Spatial analysis of forest–tun- dra
ecotones reveals the influence of topography and vege- tation on alpine
treeline patterns in the subarctic. Ann Am Assoc Geogr 110(1):18–35

Dial RJ, Maher CT, Hewitt RE, Sullivan PF (2022) Sufficient conditions
for rapid range expansion of a boreal conifer. Nature. https:// doi.
org/ 10. 1038/ s41586- 022- 05093-2 Elliott GP, Cowell CM (2015) Slope
aspect mediates fine-scale tree establishment patterns at upper treeline
during wet and dry periods of the 20th century. Arct Antarct Alp Res
47(4):681–692

EnMAP-Box Developers (2019) : EnMAP-Box  3 - A QGIS Plugin to process
and visualize hyperspectral remote sens- ing data. https:// enmap- box.
readt hedocs. io

Escofier B, Pagès J(2008) Analyses factorielles simples et mul- tiples:
Objectifs, méthodes, et interprétation, Malakoff. France: Dunod

Feuillet T, Mercier D, Decaulne A, Cossart E (2012) Classi- fication of
sorted patterned ground areas based on their environmental
characteristics (Skagafjörður, Northern Ice- land. Geomorphology
139:577–587

Feuillet T, Birre D, Milian J, Godard V, Clauzel C, Ser- rano Notivoli R
(2020) Spatial dynamics of alpine tree lines under global warming: what
explains the mismatch between tree densification and elevational upward
shifts at the tree line ecotone? J Biogeogr 47(5):1056–1068

Grafius DR, Corstanje R, Harris JA (2018) Linking ecosystem services,
urban form and green space configuration using multivariate landscape
metric analysis. Landscape Ecol 33(4):557–573

Harsch MA, Bader MY (2011) Treeline form–a potential key to
understanding treeline dynamics. Glob Ecol Biogeogr 20(4):582–596

Herrera JM, Alagador D, Salgueiro P, Mira A (2018) A dis-
tribution-oriented approach to support landscape connec- tivity for
ecologically distinct bird species. PLoS ONE 13(4):e0194848

Hesselbarth MHK, Sciaini M, With KA, Wiegand K, Nowosad J (2019)
Landscapemetrics: an open-source R tool to cal- culate landscape
metrics. Ecography 42:1648–1657 Hofstede RGM, Dickinson KJM, Mark AF,
Narváez E (2014) A broad transition from cloud forest to páramo
character- izes an undisturbed treeline in Parque Nacional Llanga-
nates, Ecuador. Arct Antactic Alp Res 46(4):1–12

Holtmeier FK, Broll G (2005) Sensitivity and response of northern
hemisphere altitudinal and polar treelines to environmental change at
landscape and local scales. Glob Ecol Biogeogr 14(5):395–410

Holtmeier FK, Broll GE (2007) Treeline advance-driving pro-

cesses and adverse factors. Landsc Online 1:1–33

Holtmeier FK, Broll G (2019) Treeline research—from the roots of the
past to present time. A review. Forests 11(1):38

Humphries HC, Bourgeron PS, Mujica-Crapanzano LR (2008) Tree spatial
patterns and environmental relationships in the forest–alpine tundra
ecotone at Niwot Ridge. Colo USA Ecol Res 23(3):589–605

Kassambara A, Mundt F(2020) factoextra: Extract and visu- alize the
results of multivariate data analyses. R pack- age version 1.0.7.
https:// CRAN.R- proje ct. org/ packa ge= facto extra

Körner C (2012) Alpine treelines: functional ecology of the global high
elevation tree limits. Springer Science & Business Media

Körner C, Paulsen J (2004) A world wide study of high alti- tude
treeline temperatures. J Biogeogr 31(5):713–732 Kupfer JA (2012)
Landscape ecology and biogeography rethinking landscape metrics in a
post-FRAGSTATS landscape. Prog Phys Geogr 36(3):400–420

Le S, Josse J, Husson F (2008) FactoMineR: an R package

for multivariate analysis. J Stat Softw 25(1):1–18

Lin YP, Chang TK, Wu CF, Chiang TC, Lin SH (2006) Assessing impacts of
typhoons and the Chi-Chi earth- quake on Chenyulan watershed landscape
pattern in cen- tral Taiwan using landscape metrics. Environ Manage
38(1):108–125

Malandra F, Vitali A, Urbinati C, Weisberg PJ, Garbarino M (2019)
Patterns and drivers of forest landscape change in the Apennines range,
Italy. Reg Envriron Chang 19(7):1973–1985

McGarigal K, Tagil S, Cushman SA (2009) Surface metrics: an alternative
to patch metrics for the quantification of land- scape structure.
Landscape Ecol 24(3):433–450

McGarigal K(2015) FRAGSTATS help. University of Massa-

chusetts: Amherst, MA, USA, 182

Métailié JP, Paegelow M(2004) Land abandonment and the spreading of the
forest in the eastern French Pyrenees in the nineteenth to twentieth 

Milian J, Eychenne C, Barthe L (2012) Du symbole à l’action: agriculture
et pastoralisme dans la politique du Parc naturel régional des Pyrénées
Ariégeoises. Sud- Ouest Européen. Revue Géographique des Pyrénées et du
Sud-Ouest 34:51–64

Morley PJ, Donoghue DN, Chen JC, Jump AS (2020) Montane forest expansion
at high elevations drives rapid reduction in non forest area, despite no
change in mean forest eleva- tion. J Biogeogr 47(11):2405–2416

1 3Vol.: (0123456789)Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V,
Thirion B, Grisel O et  al (2011) Scikit-learn: machine learning in
Python. J Mach Learn Res 12:2825–2830

R Core Team (2022) R: A language and environment for statis- tical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria.  https:// www.R- proje ct. org/ Saulnier M, Cunill Artigas R,
Foumou LF, Buscaino S, Métailié JP, Galop D, Py-Saragaglia V (2020) A
study of late Holocene local vegetation dynamics and responses to land
use changes in an ancient charcoal making woodland in the central
Pyrenees (Ariège, France), using pedoan- thracology. Veg History
Archaeobotany 29(2):241–258 Schwarz N (2010) Urban form
revisited—selecting indicators for characterising european cities.
Landsc urban Plann 96(1):29–47

Sigdel SR, Liang E, Wang Y, Dawadi B, Camarero JJ (2020) Tree to tree
interactions slow down himalayan treeline shifts as inferred from tree
spatial patterns. J Biogeogr 47(8):1816–1826

Treml V, Chuman T (2015) Ecotonal dynamics of the altitudi- nal forest
limit are affected by terrain and vegetation struc- ture variables: an
example from the Sudetes Mountains in Central Europe. Arct Antarct Alp
Res 47(1):133–146 Treml V, Veblen TT (2017) Does tree growth sensitivity
to warming trends vary according to treeline form? J Bioge- ogr
44(7):1469–1480

Landsc Ecol

Vacquié L(2015) Modélisation prospective et échelles spatiales en
montagne: application aux Pyrénées françaises (Doc- toral dissertation,
Université Toulouse le Mirail-Toulouse II)

Van der Linden S, Rabe A, Held M, Jakimow B, Leitão PJ, Okujeni A et al
(2015) The EnMAP-Box—A toolbox and application programming interface for
EnMAP data pro- cessing. Remote Sens 7(9):11249–11266

Wang Y, Pederson N, Ellison AM, Buckley HL, Case BS, Liang E, Camarero J
(2016) Increased stem density and competition may diminish the positive
effects of warming at alpine treeline. Ecology 97(7):1668–1679

Wardle P (2008) New Zealand forest to alpine transitions in global
context. Arct Antarct Alp Res 40(1):240–249

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the
accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.

View publication stats

1 3Vol:. (1234567890) 
