Interaction effects between consumer information and
firms’ decision rules in a duopoly: how cognitive features
can impact market dynamics
Aurélien Nioche, Basile Garcia, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier, Sacha

Bourgeois-Gironde

To cite this version:

Aurélien Nioche, Basile Garcia, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier, Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde. In-
teraction effects between consumer information and firms’ decision rules in a duopoly: how cognitive
features can impact market dynamics. Palgrave Communications, 2019, 5 (1), ￿10.1057/s41599-019-
0241-x￿. ￿hal-02080610￿

HAL Id: hal-02080610

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02080610

Submitted on 26 Mar 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

ARTICLE

https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

OPEN

Interaction effects between consumer information
and ﬁrms' decision rules in a duopoly: how
cognitive features can impact market dynamics

Aurélien Nioche
Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde2,3,11

1,2,3,4,5, Basile Garcia2,3,4,5,6,7,8, Thomas Boraud4,5,9, Nicolas Rougier4,5,8,10 &

;
,
:
)
(
0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

ABSTRACT Duopolies are situations where two independent sellers compete for capturing
market share. Such duopolies exist in the world economy (e.g., Boeing/Airbus, Samsung/
Apple, Visa/MasterCard) and have been studied extensively in the literature using theore-
tical models. Among these models, the spatial model of Hotelling (1929) is certainly the most
proliﬁc and has generated subsequent literature, each work introducing some variation
leading to different conclusions. However, most models assume consumers have unlimited
access to information (perfect information hypothesis) and to be rational. Here, we consider
a situation where consumers have limited access to information and explore how this factor
inﬂuences the behavior of competing ﬁrms. We ﬁrst characterized three decision-making
processes followed by individual ﬁrms (maximizing one's proﬁt, maximizing one's relative
proﬁt with respect to the competitor; or tacit collusion) using a simulated model, varying the
level of information of consumers. These manipulations alternatively lead the ﬁrms to
minimally or maximally differentiate their relative position. We then tested the model with
human participants in the role of ﬁrms and characterized their behavior according to the
model. Our results demonstrate that limited access to information by consumers can actually
induce a mutually beneﬁcial non-competitive behavior of ﬁrms, which is not traceable to
explicit collusive strategies. Imperfect information on the part of consumers can hence be
exploited by ﬁrms through basic and blind decision rules.

1 Aalto University, School of Electrical Engineering, Department of Communications and Networking, 02150 Espoo, Finland. 2 Institut Jean Nicod,
Département d′Etudes Cognitives, ENS, EHESS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France. 3 Institut Jean Nicod, Département d′Etudes Cognitives, CNRS,
UMR 8129, 75005 Paris, France. 4 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, Université de Bordeaux, 33000 Bordeaux, France. 5 Institut des Maladies
Neurodégénératives, CNRS, UMR 5293, 33000 Bordeaux, France. 6 Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives Computationnelles, Département d′Etudes
Cognitives, ENS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France. 7 Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives Computationnelles, INSERM, U960, 75005 Paris,
France. 8 Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 33405 Talence, France. 9 Centre Expert Parkinson, CHU Bordeaux, 33000 Bordeaux, France. 10 LaBRI, Université de
Bordeaux, INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, 33405 Talence, France. 11 Laboratoire d′Economie Mathématique et de Microéconomie Appliquée, Université Panthéon
Assas, 75006 Paris, France. These authors contributed equally: Aurélien Nioche, Basile Garcia. These authors jointly supervised this work: Nicolas P. Rougier,
Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.N. (email: nioche.aurelien@gmail.com)

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

(e.g., Boeing/Airbus,

IntroductionDuopolies are situations where two independent sellers

compete for capturing market share. There are actually
numerous examples of such situations in the world
economy
Samsung/Apple, Visa/Mas-
terCard). What is particularly interesting in these situations is the
fact that it is not rare to observe sellers adopting a similar posi-
tioning on the market, both in geographical terms and in terms of
product differentiation (e.g., Burger King/McDonalds). This can
appear counterintuitive at ﬁrst glance: one could spontaneously
assume that sellers would try to avoid such behavior in order to
reduce competition. The ﬁrst formal model proposed by Hotell-
ing (1929) for describing such situations has provided an expla-
nation on why and how ﬁrms could be incentivized to minimally
differentiate. His model considers a pool of consumers that are
uniformly spread over a one-dimensional segment. Two ﬁrms
selling the same product have to decide where to locate on this
segment and what price to offer for their product, knowing that
each consumer will choose a ﬁrm according to its relative distance
(linear transportation costs) and the price of the product. The
in such conditions, ﬁrms tend to
original study holds that
aggregate and compete near the center of the segment (minimal
differentiation principle) due to the effort of the ﬁrms to capture
the largest number of consumers. However, subsequent research
(d’Aspremont et al., 1979; Cremer et al., 1991; Economides, 1993;
Brenner, 2005) demonstrated the existence of an antagonist
principle of maximal differentiation, using either quadratic
transportation costs, a higher number of competitors or a higher
number of dimensions on which ﬁrms can differentiate them-
selves. In the end, both minimal and maximal differentiation can
be incentivized and observed (Irmen and Jacques-François, 1998).
Here, we show how the level of information of consumers may
induce different behavior for the two ﬁrms, depending on their
strategies.

factors

Several experimental studies have already attempted to char-
inﬂuencing differentiation. For
acterize the various
instance, Kruse et al. (2000) allowed for communication between
participants in the role of ﬁrms and showed that they tend to
group in the center when communication is limited, but on the
contrary, to differentiate themselves if communication is unlim-
ited (cooperation). Similarly, Kephart and Friedman (2015) set-
up a protocol contrasting continuous and discrete time and
demonstrated that continuous time could trigger a maximal dif-
ferentiation strategy, as it allows some form of communication,
and as a consequence, some form of cooperation. These two
ﬁndings brought together suggest that quick and/or full infor-
mation transmission can help to reach a cooperative equilibrium
in a typical Hotelling's model. Several other studies brought up
arguments supporting the robustness of
the minimal differ-
for example, the four-player
entiation phenomenon such as,
version of
the game by Huck et al. (2002) or in Barreda-
Tarrazona et al. (2011), where subjects tended to group in the
center under several experimental conditions. Although there is a
treatment in Barreda-Tarrazona et al. (2011) with human subjects
as consumers, what is common to all these works is their shared
assumption of the fact that ﬁrms are competing to capture
rational and fully informed consumers even when they document
spatial behavior that departs from Nash equilibrium when it
theoretically exists. The case when consumers have no full
informational access to the ﬁrms' strategies and when ﬁrms must
compete over this less than completely informed consumers have
not been addressed, to our knowledge, in the experimental lit-
erature related to Hotelling (1929). It has yet important impli-
cations as it is a common fact that consumers are not fully aware
of all options available on the markets they participate in and that
ﬁrms know and anticipate this fact in their own strategies.

Stigler (1961) argued that the information question should be
fully taken into account in such competition models, as it can
deeply impact
the nature of equilibria. This is particularly
important as consumer choices are known to be subject to several
biases and based on partial information (Thaler, 1980; Kahne-
man, 2003). More precisely, the uncertainty resulting from the
imperfect nature of information has been shown to provide an
incentive for the ﬁrms to regroup and transparency of the market
is, thus, a prominent factor for differentiation (Webber, 1972;
Stahl, 1982). In line with predictions from earlier studies (Eaton
and Richard, 1975; Brown, 1989; Dudey, 1990; Schultz, 2009), we
postulate that in a duopoly context, the consumers' access to
information is a critical factor for the differentiation of the two
ﬁrms.

We thus deﬁned a formal turn-based model (Prescott and
Vissher, 1977; Loertscher and Muehlheusser, 2011) that allows us
to explicitly manipulate the amount of information available to
consumers while retaining their rational nature. Agents can act
rationally under partial information and thereby induce obser-
vable organizational patterns in the market that differ from what
is expected under perfect information. We test the hypothesis that
the amount of information accessible to consumers can variably
drive the differentiation of the two ﬁrms: when this amount is
low, ﬁrms will be maximally differentiated; when this amount is
high, ﬁrms will be minimally differentiated. We test
this
hypothesis using a simulation where we consider three decision-
making processes for the ﬁrms, namely (i) a maximization of
short-term proﬁts, (ii) a maximization of the difference of proﬁts
between the ﬁrm and its opponent, (iii) a maximization of the
proﬁts of the two ﬁrms. Following Rubinstein’s prescriptions
(Rubinstein, 1991), the aim of these decision rules is to incor-
porate the potential perception of the situation by the decision
makers. These rules
indeed constitute plausible behavioral
responses on the part of ﬁrms in the light of partial information
on the part of consumers. These decision rules helped us to
characterize the behavior of human subjects for the experimental
part of this work where subjects play the role of the ﬁrms under
different informational conditions. The choice of using the ﬁrst
decision rule is straightforward: a ﬁrm only pays attention to its
current own proﬁt, considering further expectations about the
future not reliable. A ﬁrm may consider the behavior the other
ﬁrm either too difﬁcult to compute or not reliable. This is tan-
tamount to ignore the other player strategies. This type of “blind”
decision rule has a presence in the Industrial Organization lit-
erature stemming as far as Rothschild (1947) in which securing
one’s proﬁt is the only rule by which a ﬁrm’s behavior is guided.
Regarding the second decision rule, motivations are dual. It
could lie on an anchoring bias (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974): it
is difﬁcult to evaluate the success of a move per se, a move is
considered efﬁcient if it leads to better proﬁts than its opponent.
In other words, ﬁrms' strategies evaluation relies on comparisons
to a given point instead of evaluation in absolute terms. Secondly,
it could be due to a zero-sum bias (Meegan, 2010; Różycka-Tran
et al.,), even if in our model, the proﬁt of one ﬁrm is not
necessarily made at the expense of the other ﬁrm (see ‘Methods’
Indeed, considering—sometimes wrongfully—that a
section).
greater proﬁt for its opponent is a proﬁt loss for itself, a ﬁrm
could decide to make its choice only considering the proﬁt
difference.

The use of the third heuristic lies on the expectation of tacit
collusion (TC) with the opponent: if both ﬁrms try to maximize
their own proﬁt as well as the proﬁt of their opponent, it would
avoid the drawbacks of a competitive situation and leads to higher
proﬁts. It could be also seen as a search for Pareto optimality
(Pareto, 1964), that is to say following the strategies that lead to a

2

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

ARTICLE

repartition of proﬁts such as no ﬁrm could earn more, otherwise,
it would be at the expense of the other.

Therefore, we hypothesized that (i) depending on the infor-
mation available to consumers, either a minimum differentiation
or a maximal differentiation can apply, (ii) the effect of the
information available to consumers can be modulated by the
ﬁrms’ decision rules.

cons

g.

max

− p

2 or F

1 or F

Methods
Model description. We consider a unidimensional normalized
cons evenly spread locations such that xi
space X discretized into n
= (i − 1)/(n
min integer
cons
max. We consider two ﬁrms
prices P ranging from p
{Fj}j∈[1,2] and a group of n
f

− 1). We consider a set of 1 + p
min to p
cons consumers Cif gi2 1;:::;n

Each ﬁrm Fi = (xi,pi) is characterized by a position xi and a
price pi. Consumers are uniformly spread over space such that xi
= (i − 1)/(ncons − 1). View radius is deﬁned on a per-experiment
basis and is the same for all the consumers during an experiment.
The ﬁrm position is a free variable and must correspond to a
consumer position such that there are only n
cons different possible
positions for a ﬁrm. Price pi is a free variable and is discrete: there
are P possible prices spread uniformly between a minimal price
pmin and a maximal price pmax. Simulations are turn-based
(Prescott and Vissher, 1977; Loertscher and Muehlheusser, 2011).
We distinguish at each turn an active ﬁrm that is allowed to select
a strategy and a passive ﬁrm that has to wait for the next turn to
react and deploy its own strategy. More speciﬁcally, at turn t,
Firm A (F
2) chooses its location and its price, consumers
choose a ﬁrm and proﬁts are collected for both ﬁrms. At turn t +
1, Firm B (F
1) chooses its location and its price (while Firm
A keeps location and price from turn t), consumers choose a ﬁrm
and proﬁts are collected for both ﬁrms. Let ∏i be the proﬁt of the
ﬁrm Fi for a single turn deﬁned by ∏i = pi·qi with pi the price at
which Fi sells its product, and qi the quantity Fi sold. There is no
production cost. Consumers are able to buy only one product per
turn. They consume it immediately, in such a manner that they
do not constitute any stock. This implies that a ﬁrm produces a
maximum of n

cons products per turn.

[xi−ri,xi+ri]. Only ﬁrms

Each consumer Ci = (xi,ri) is characterized by a position xi and
a view radius ri. The view radius deﬁnes a segment centered on
the consumer
located inside this
segment are considered by the consumer (see Fig. 1). Conse-
quently, at each turn, some consumers will see only one ﬁrm and
will be captive since they cannot choose what ﬁrm to buy from.
Some consumers will see both ﬁrms and are named volatile
because they can choose any of the two ﬁrms depending on their
choice criterion. Some consumers won't see any ﬁrms and cannot
buy, and, thus, are named ghost consumers. A view radius of 0
means the ﬁrm has to be at the same position to be seen while a
radius of 1 means the ﬁrm is seen by all
the consumers.
Reciprocally, and depending on the consumer view radius, ﬁrms
have access only to a subset of all the consumers, they are named
the potential consumers and represent the sum of captive and
volatile consumers.

p

(minimal

Parameters. For all
the simulations, we used the following
cons (number of consumers) = 21, n
parameters: n
price (number of
p
price) = 1,
prices) = 11,
(maximal
min
max
= 100. The initial position and price for the
price) = 10, n
passive ﬁrm (ﬁrst turn) are randomly assigned. The view radius
(r) is the same for all the consumers and is comprised between 0
and 1. For each of the three different decision-making processes,
we ran (i) 1000 simulations with r randomly (uniformly) drawn
(ii) 64 additional
between 0 and 1 for each simulation;

turn

simulations with r = 0.25 and r = 0.50 respectively, in order to
characterize experimental data.

Decision-making processes. Consumers do not choose the
amount of information they dispose of. They may see zero, one or
two ﬁrms. In the event that they do not see any ﬁrm, they are
unable to buy and have to wait for the next turn. If they see a
single ﬁrm, they have no means to compare prices and have to
buy from this ﬁrm, independently of the price (each consumer
has an unlimited budget). When they are able to see the two
ﬁrms, they buy from the ﬁrm offering the lowest price. In the
speciﬁc case where prices of both ﬁrms are equal, they choose
randomly between the two. Firms have perfect knowledge of the
environment: they know (i) the price and the position of the
opponent, (ii) the location of each consumer x
i, (iii) the view
radius ri of each consumer and (iv) the decision-making method
of consumers. Firms from two different simulations can differ in
their decision-making process but two ﬁrms from the same
simulation share the same decision-making process. Decision-
making process of a ﬁrm is either one of the three following
decision rules:

Proﬁt maximization (PM). Each time an active ﬁrm plays, it
computes the potential proﬁts for all the possible position-price
couples regarding the current decision-making process of the
passive ﬁrm, and chooses the couple position-price that max-
imizes proﬁt (in the case where several couples position-price lead
to the same best payoff, the ﬁrm chooses randomly between these
moves);

Difference maximization (DM). If Firm A is the active ﬁrm, the
difference between its own proﬁt and the proﬁt of Firm B is
computed for each possible move, and the move leading to the
greatest difference is chosen (in case of multiple moves leading to
the greatest difference, the move is randomly chosen between
those moves);

Tacit collusion (TC). The distance to the maximum proﬁt for
Firm A and the distance to the maximum proﬁt for Firm B are
computed for each move the active ﬁrm can play, the chosen
move is the one leading to the minimum sum of the distances.

Firm decision-making process. The choice space is deﬁned by
the set Y, that is the Cartesian product of all possible location-
price couples:

n
(cid:1)
Y ¼ xi; pj

(cid:3)

o

xi2X; pj2P

The expected proﬁt of the ﬁrm A is deﬁned by the number of
potential consumers (the sum of captive and volatile consumers)
that a ﬁrm can expect when making the move yα, that is locating
at position xi and setting price pj.

Let the boolean-valued function VCk determine if a consumer

Ck sees the location xi:

(cid:4)

VCk

xið Þ ¼

1
0

if xk (cid:2) rk (cid:3) xi (cid:3) xk þ rk;
otherwise:

Let the function VCk deﬁne the proﬁt that the ﬁrm A can expect
from a consumer Ck for the move yα = (xi,pj), knowing that the

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

Fig. 1 Model. The model is represented by a one-dimensional line segment over which consumers (black dots) are spread uniformly. Firms (outlined red
dots) are free to position themselves on any consumer position. Consumers view ﬁrms that fall within their view radius such that some consumers view
only one ﬁrm (captive consumers), some consumers view both ﬁrms (volatile consumers) and some consumers view none (ghost consumers). The
number of captive, volatile, and ghost consumers for a ﬁrm depends on the size of the view radius of the consumers and the respective position of the two
ﬁrms. The number of captive consumers increases as the view radius of consumers decreases. The number of potential consumers (captive + volatile) of a
ﬁrm is a function of the position of the ﬁrm and the view radius of the consumers. When the level of information is high (r = 0.50), there is a unique
position where all the consumers are potential consumers for a ﬁrm. When the level of information is low (r = 0.25), there is a whole segment where
exactly half the consumers are potential consumers for a ﬁrm

move of the opponent is yβ = (xm,pn):
8
>><

if pj>pn ^ VCk

(cid:3)

(cid:1)

h

WA
Ck

yα; yβ

¼

>>:

0
0:5
1

i

xið Þ ¼ 0;

xmð
Þ ¼ 1
if pj ¼ pn ^ VCk

xmð
otherwise:

\_ VCk
Þ ¼ 1;

When following a PM decision rule,

the active ﬁrm A

maximizes its expected proﬁt EA
n

(cid:5)

λ ¼ arg max

i

yi;yβ such that:

(cid:1)
EA yi; yβ

(cid:3)

o

(cid:6)

yi2Y

Then, the expected proﬁt of the ﬁrm A for a given move yα is
obtained from the function EA, knowing that the move of ﬁrm B
is yβ:

(cid:3)

(cid:1)
EA yα; yβ

¼

Xn

cons

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

WA

ck yα; yβ

k¼1
A ﬁrm makes the move yλ (that is a speciﬁc combination of
position and price) using one of the following decision rules:
proﬁt maximization (PM), difference maximization (DM), or
tacit collusion (TC).

When following a DM decision rule,

the active ﬁrm A
maximizes the difference between its own expected proﬁt and the
corresponding expected proﬁt of the passive ﬁrm B:

λ ¼ arg max

i

(cid:5)

n

(cid:3)

(cid:1)
EA yi; yβ

(cid:1)
(cid:2) EB yi; yβ

(cid:3)

o

(cid:6)

yi2Y

When following a TC decision rule, the ﬁrm A makes the move
maximizing both its own expected proﬁt and the expected proﬁt
its opponent, by considering the relative distance to the
of

4

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

ARTICLE

maximum expected proﬁt for both ﬁrms:

(cid:3)

(cid:1)
ΔA yα; yβ

¼ max

(cid:5)

n
(cid:1)
EA yi; yβ

(cid:3)

o

yi2Y

(cid:6)

(cid:1)
(cid:2) EA yα; yβ

(cid:3)

(cid:5)

n

λ¼ arg min

i

(cid:3)

(cid:1)
ΔA yi; yβ

(cid:1)
þ ΔB yi; yβ

(cid:3)

o

(cid:6)

yi2Y

Experiments. Participants were recruited using the Amazon
Mechanical Turk (AMT) platform. AMT is an online crowd-
sourcing service where anonymous online workers complete web-
based tasks in exchange for monetary compensation. It was noted
that responses from AMT participants were at least as reliable as
those obtained in laboratories (Buhrmester et al., 2011; Amir
et al., 2012). In addition, AMT participants exhibit similar
judgment and decision biases such as framing effects, conjunction
fallacy, or outcome bias (Paolacci et al., 2010). The ethics
approval for this project was provided by the Ecole Normale
Supérieure as per the school's guidelines. In line with ethical
guidelines, all participants provided informed consent before
proceeding to the experiment. Participants also had to ﬁll in a
survey asking their age, nationality, and gender. Monetary com-
pensation of one dollar was offered to each participant, with a
bonus proportional
In average, participants
received a compensation of $2.64 (±0.58 SD). Participants were
paired inside a dedicated virtual room and each pair went
through one of the four treatments. The four treatments corre-
spond to the combination of two factors: consumers' view radius
(r) and the display of the opponent's proﬁt (s). The consumers'
view radius that was either low (r = 0.25) or high (r = 0.50) and
the opponent's proﬁt was either hidden (s = 0) or displayed
(s = 1). For all the rounds, we used the same parameters as for
simulations except that we maintained constant the initial loca-
tions of ﬁrms: one of the two ﬁrms was placed at one of the
extrema of the segment, the other ﬁrm at the other extrema. Their
initial price was set to 5. The subject playing ﬁrst was randomly
selected. The number of rooms (with two subjects each) for each
s = 1,
s = 1, n
condition is:
n
= 26).
eco
Additional information is provided in the supplementary section.

= 26),
(r = 0.25,
= 26), (r = 0.50, s = 1, n
eco

= 30), (r = 0.50, s = 1, n

to their score.

(r = 0.25,

eco

eco

Analysis. Only data obtained from subjects that have fully
completed the experimental procedure has been used for analysis.
Among the 410 subjects that signed up to the platform,
222 subjects went through all the process (see Supplementary for
more information). The reasons why a subject may not have
completed the procedure are (i) the impossibility to match him
with another subject, (ii) quit before the end, (iii) a technical
problem (i.e., poor computer performances). The sample of
subjects we used for analysis matches the demographic char-
acteristics of AMT (Ipeirotis, 2010). Regarding the composition of
the participants, we noticed a quasi-gender parity (women
represented 54.1% and men 45.9%). The average age was 34.75 ±
9.54. We counted a dozen nationalities, the most common being
American (75.78%) with a large majority, and, to a lesser extent,
Indian (11.71%).

We drew a three-dimensional proﬁle for each subject. Each
dimension corresponds to a particular decision rule (PM, DM,
TC). The score associated with each dimension assesses the extent
to which a subject behaves accordingly to what a speciﬁc decision
(cid:1)
rule implies to do.
H yα; yβ

be the value of the move yα relatively to

Let be vA

(cid:3)

the decision rule H ∈ {PM, DM, TC} (respectively, for PM, DM,

TC) at time t ∈ [1,n

turn]:

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

8
>><

>>:

EA yα;yβ
ð

(cid:1)
EA yi;yβ
ð
f

max

Þ

Þ

gyi 2Y

vA
PM

yα; yβ
(cid:5)

(cid:3) if max

¼

n
(cid:1)
EA yi; yβ

(cid:3)

o

(cid:6)

> 0;

yi2Y

1 otherwise:

8
>><
>>:

max

(cid:1)
f

EA yα;yβ
ð

Þ(cid:2)EB yα;yβ
ð

Þ

EA yi;yβ
ð

Þ(cid:2)EB yi;yβ
ð

Þ
gyi2Y

vA
DM

(cid:3)

(cid:1)
yα; yβ
(cid:5)
n

(cid:3) if max

¼
(cid:1)
EA yi; yβ

(cid:3)

(cid:1)
(cid:2) EB yi; yβ

(cid:3)

o

(cid:6)

> 0;

yi2Y

1 otherwise:
(cid:3)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

min

vA
TC

(cid:3)

ΔA yi;yβ
ð
f
ΔA yα;yβ
ð

ÞþΔB yi;yβ
Þ
ð
gyi 2Y
ÞþΔB yα;yβ
Þ
ð

yα; yβ

¼

(cid:1)
if ΔA yα; yβ

(cid:3)

(cid:1)
þ ΔB yα; yβ

(cid:3)

> 0;

8
>>><
>>>:

1 otherwise:
For convenience, we did not include the variable t in the
deﬁnition of the v functions. So, let’s assume a function f such as:

fH i; tð

Þ ¼ vi

(cid:3)

(cid:1)
H yα; yβ

for time t

The score for a subject i and for a decision rule t is simply the
average value of f over time:

sH ið Þ ¼

Xn

turn

1

n

turn

t

fH i; tð

Þ

For the analysis, we pooled the individual scores by experi-
mental condition. As we did not expect a normal distribution of
the data due to clustering effects at the boundaries of our scales
(i.e., price), assessment of statistic relevancy of our observations
has been made with Mann–Whitney's U-ranking test, applying
Bonferroni's corrections for multiple comparisons. We set the
signiﬁcance threshold at 1%.

Results
Simulations. In order to test our hypothesis regarding the
inﬂuence of the information level of consumer (measured by his
view radius) on the differentiation of the two ﬁrms, we ran
1000 simulations using a random view radius between 0 and 1
and tested three different decision rules for the ﬁrms, namely PM,
DM, and TC. For each of these simulations, we measured the
mean distance between the two ﬁrms, which is the distance
separating the two ﬁrms averaged over the last third of the 100
turns (i.e., the last 33 turns). We report in Fig. 2 all these distances
on the y-axis and the corresponding view radius on the x-axis.
Minimal differentiation corresponds to a mean distance of 0 ﬁrms
being placed at the center of the linear city while maximal dif-
ferentiation corresponds to a mean distance of 0.5 one ﬁrm being
placed on the ﬁrst quarter of the linear city and the other one at
the last quarter.

The high dispersion of the points when r is close to 0 or near 1
can be explained by the fact that the ﬁrm location has almost no
impact on the ﬁrm proﬁts. If the value of r is close to zero, the
consumers are almost blind in the sense that their view radius is
so narrow that except if the competitor is very close, each ﬁrm
would sell its product to only a few consumers, regardless of its
position. If r is close to 1, the visual ﬁeld of the consumer is so
broad that it will see both ﬁrms and these ﬁrms will always
compete. For such extreme values of r,
the mean distance

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

Fig. 2 Simulation results. For each of the three decision rules (proﬁt maximization [PM], difference maximization [DM], tacit collusion [TC]),
1000 simulations were run with a random (uniform) view radius for the consumers. The distance between the two ﬁrms, the proﬁt and the price as a
function of the consumers' view radius is displayed in a (PM), c (DM), and e (TC). Each dot corresponds to the mean distance that has been observed
between the two ﬁrms during a single simulation and vertical bars indicate the standard deviation. Mean prices and proﬁts are reported on the right using
gray bars and the standard deviation in black. For each of the three decision rules (PM, DM, TC) and for low- and high-view radius (r = 0.25, r = 0.50), 25
additional simulations were run and observed distance, price, and proﬁt are displayed on the right (b, d, f) in order to compare them to the experimental
results

observed is close to 0.33, which corresponds to the mean distance
observed for random moves. As each consumer sees only its own
position or sees both ﬁrms, it is indeed expected that the ﬁrms
randomly choose their location, which corresponds to a mean
distance of 0.33.

We can observe in Fig. 2a that for the PM decision rule, a view
radius of 0.50 corresponds
to the minimal differentiation
principle where the two ﬁrms compete to occupy the central
position because this is the unique position that gives access to all
the consumers (all consumers are potential consumers for the
ﬁrm positioned at the center). It thus makes sense for the two
ﬁrms to compete around this position and to try to get a
maximum number of consumers in order to maximize their
proﬁt. Because of this competition, the mean price for both ﬁrms
is very low and leads to moderate proﬁts. When the view radius is
reduced to 0.25, the mean distance between the two ﬁrms is
maximal (0.5). This speciﬁc radius corresponds to a case where
there is a possibility of local markets as shown on Fig. 1. The two
the plateau when r = 0.25 represent a compromise
ends of
between competition and a lesser number of consumers, but
those consumers are captive for each ﬁrm. This allows both ﬁrms
to set higher prices and to maximize their proﬁts. When the DM
decision rule is used (see Fig. 2c), ﬁrms tend to minimally
differentiate, the proximity forcing them to reduce their prices
and hence, greatly reducing their proﬁts compared to what
happens with ﬁrms using a PM decision rule. As one
would expect, when ﬁrms try to optimize at the same time
their proﬁt and their opponent's proﬁt (TC decision rule), ﬁrms
tend to maximally differentiate and establish local monopolies
(see Fig. 2e).

Focusing our attention on the speciﬁc cases where r = 0.25 or
r = 0.50 (Fig. 2b, d and f), one can notice quite different situations
in terms of distance, price and proﬁts for the three policies
respectively. For r = 0.25, the principle of maximal differentiation
applies for PM and TC decision rules, leading to maximal prices
and proﬁts. This is not true for the DM decision rule where the
principle of minimal differentiation seems to apply, leading to
moderate prices and proﬁts. For r = 0.50, the situation is different
and both the PM and DM decision rules lead to a minimal
differentiation of the two ﬁrms with low prices and proﬁts. Only
the tacit collusion decision rule (TC) allows for an implicit equal
share of the market, with highest prices and proﬁts. Together,
these three decision rules allow to give account on minimum or
maximum differentiation in the two speciﬁc cases of low and high
level of information available to the consumers.

Experiments. When considering the effect of the view radius of
consumers on the mean distances, prices and proﬁts (each of
these measures being an average for each pair of subjects, in such
a manner that each observation accounts for a two subjects
couple), experimental results are very similar to the results of
simulations when the PM decision rule is used, and this, inde-
pendently of whether the opponent's proﬁt is visible or not.
Indeed, a large view radius induces a minimal differentiation
effect where the two ﬁrms are led to a ﬁerce competition around
the central
location, subsequently decreasing their prices and
proﬁts. Conversely, when consumers dispose of a narrow view
radius, ﬁrms tend to exploit this disability by locating at the
endpoints of the segment.

6

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

ARTICLE

More precisely, the median distance is greater when r = 0.25
than when r = 0.50 (when s = 0, u = 81.5, p < 0.001, n = 59; when
s = 1, u = 33.0, p < 0.001, n = 52). The same applies for the prices
(when s = 0, u = 128.5, p < 0.001, n = 59; when s = 1, u = 30.5, p
< 0.001, n = 52) and for the proﬁts (when s = 0, u = 178.0, p <
0.001, n = 59; when s = 1, u = 131.5, p < 0.001, n = 52).

The display of the opponent's proﬁt (s = 1) has a limited effect
on the general shape of the data relatively to distance, price, and
proﬁt. It has an effect on distance only when r = 0.25 (when
r = 0.25, u = 191.0, u = 191.0, p = 0.007, n = 56; when r = 0.50,
u = 283.0, p = 0.686, n = 55) and no effect on price (when
r = 0.25, u = 321.0, p = 1.000, n = 56; when r = 0.50, u = 311.0,
p = 1.000, n = 55)
(when r = 0.25, u = 252.0,
p = 0.143, n = 56; when r = 0.50, u = 296.5, p = 1.000, n = 55).
A table summarizing the results is available in the supplemen-

and proﬁt

tary section (see Table S4).

Although the general shape of data is close to what has been
observed with simulations using the PM decision rule,
the
dispersion of results is much more spread out and we assume this
scattering of
the data can be attributed to inter-individual
differences. In order to study this inter-individual variability, we
computed three individual scores for each subject, assessing the
compatibility of
the
experiment with the use of (i) a PM decision rule, (ii) a DM
decision rule, (iii) a TC decision rule. Distribution by experi-
mental condition of PM, DM, and TC scores are shown in Fig. 3b.
A matrix correlation of the scores by experimental condition has
also been computed (see Fig. 3c).

their behavior for each time step of

Considering the effect of the ﬁeld of view on individual scoring,
the results indicate that the DM scores are higher in condition of
high information while PM scores are lower. The variation of the
view radius has no signiﬁcant
impact on TC scores. More
precisely, considering the effect of ﬁeld of view on individual
scoring and comparing when r = 0.50 to when r = 0.25, for both
value of s, we observe that the DM score are signiﬁcantly higher
(when s = 0, u = 488.0, p < 0.001, n = 118; when s = 1, u = 460.0,
p < 0.001, n = 104) and the PM scores are signiﬁcantly lower
(when s = 0, u = 1048.0, p < 0.001, n = 118; when s = 1,
u = 861.0, p < 0.001, n = 104). Still when r = 0.50 compared to
when r = 0.25, the TC scores are signiﬁcantly lower, but only
when s = 1(when s = 0, u = 1452.5, p = 0.730, n = 118; when
s = 1, u = 461.5, p < 0.001, n = 104).

Considering the effect of the display of the opponent’s score,
the results indicate that if the opponent's score is displayed, the
DM scores are higher in condition of
low information. In
contrary, it has no signiﬁcant impact on PM and TC scoring.
More precisely, considering the effect of opponent's proﬁt
displaying on individual scoring (i.e., when s = 1 compared to
when s = 0), the DM score are signiﬁcantly higher only when
r = 0.25 (when r = 0.25, u = 733.0, p < 0.001, n = 112; when
r = 0.50, u = 1031.0, p = 0.026, n = 110), while the PM scores are
not statistically different (when r = 0.25, u = 1248.5, p = 0.413,
n = 112; when r = 0.50, u = 1438.5, p = 1.000, n = 110), neither
are the TC scores (when r = 0.25, u = 1204.5, p = 0.227, n = 112;
when r = 0.50, u = 1376.5, p = 0.216, n = 110). A table summar-
izing the results is available in the supplementary section (see
Table S5).

Also, similarly to the results obtained by simulation, a radius
value of 0.25 allows to discriminate the use of a PM decision rule
from a TC decision rule, and a radius value of 0.50 allows to
discriminate the use of a PM decision rule from a DM decision
rule. This is especially noticeable when looking at the distribution
of the scores (Fig. 3b) but also when looking at the correlation
matrix (Fig. 3c). When r = 0.25, a subject who has a high score in
PM would likely to have a high score in TC but a low score in
DM, while when r = 0.50, a subject who has a high score in PM

would likely have a high score in DM but a low score in TC.
Hence, when trying to discriminate different decision rules, a
condition of low information (r = 0.25) allows to distinguish a
PM from a DM decision rule, but not from a TC decision rule.
Conversely, in a condition of high information (r = 0.50), a DM is
indistinguishable from a PM decision rule, but a TC decision rule
is. In other words, a DM decision rule could be interpreted as a
decision rule revealed solely in a condition of low information,
while a TC decision rule could be interpreted as an adaptive
decision rule in condition of high information.

If we now look more closely at individual behaviors,

it is
striking to see that when subjects competing together have been
identiﬁed both as users of a speciﬁc decision rule (i.e., obtained a
high score toward PM, DM, or TC), the dynamics of their playing
is very similar to the corresponding simulation. With r = 0.25,
subjects using PM decision rule tend to position themselves at the
ﬁrst and third quarters of the segment and both set a high selling
price (see Fig. 4a). However, when r = 0.50, subjects position
themselves at the center and immediately lower their price (see
Fig. 4b) even though they are less inclined to do so compared to
simulated ﬁrms using the corresponding decision rule. They are
actually trying to regularly increase their price. The situation is a
bit different for subjects using a DM decision rule when r = 0.25
(see Fig. 4c). In that case, the positions of subjects oscillate around
the center accompanied with an increase and decrease in prices,
indicating a will to capture the market of their opponent. When
r = 0.50, both simulated ﬁrms and human subjects using a TC
decision rule set their prices at their maximum but the dynamics
are not exactly the same (see Fig. 4f). Subjects positioned
themselves further apart, and this increase of the distance can be
assumed to be due to an intent from the subjects to communicate
their goodwill to their opponent.

Discussion
The principle of minimal differentiation as exposed in the
seminal paper of Hotelling (1929) did not reach consensus in the
abundant subsequent literature. Once some restrictive assump-
tions of the initial model are relaxed (for instance, number of
ﬁrms, spatial structure, or cost structure), it has been shown that
the principle of minimal differentiation can be invalidated and
that the antagonistic principle of maximal differentiation could
apply (d’Aspremont et al., 1979; Cremer et al., 1991; Economides,
1993; Brenner, 2005). In addition of these theoretical results,
several experimental studies show that by manipulating either the
communication between ﬁrms (Kruse et al., 2000) or by manip-
ulating the time structure (Kephart and Friedman, 2015)—what
also indirectly impacted the ability of the ﬁrms to communicate
about their intentions—it was possible to induce either a minimal
or a maximal differentiation between the ﬁrms. Similarly to Kruse
et al. (2000) and Kephart and Friedman (2015), and despite the
robustness of the minimal differentiation principle highlighted by
the experimental results of Huck et al. (2002) and Barreda-
Tarrazona et al. (2011), our results report both phenomena:
simulations and experiments allowed us to demonstrate that the
consumers' amount of information affects the differentiation of
ﬁrms with respect to their decision-making strategies. We isolated
incentives supporting either a geographic concentration and a
ﬁerce price competition resulting in drastic reduction of proﬁts,
or a maximal differentiation inducing a softening of the price
competition and thereby a large increase in ﬁrms' proﬁts. How-
ever, our results also show that the principle of maximal differ-
entiation may be systemic and cannot be uniquely attributed to
the deliberate use of a cooperative strategy on the part of ﬁrms (as
in Kruse et al., 2000), or to TC (as in Kephart and Friedman,
2015).

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

Fig. 3 Experimental results. a Combined effect of the consumers' view radius and the display of the opponent's score on distance, price, and proﬁt. The
white dots indicate the median, the thick black bars indicate the IQR. The extrema of the thin bars indicate the lower and upper adjacent values. The
colored areas give an indication of the shape of the data distribution. b Mean scores of proﬁt maximization (PM), difference maximization (DM), and tacit
collusion (TC) by experimental condition. The white dots indicate the median, the thick black bars indicate the IQR. The extrema of the thin bars indicate
the lower and upper adjacent values. The colored areas give an indication of the shape of the data distribution. c Score correlation matrix. Blue color
indicates a strong negative correlation and red color a strong positive correlation

Indeed, when consumers have only access to a low level of
information,
the occurrence of maximal differentiation in
experimental results can in turn be interpreted as an adaptation
to these consumers' limited access to information. In that cir-
cumstance, ﬁrms using a PM decision rule formed local mono-
polies without any willingness to cooperate with the other ﬁrm.
This supports and provides a possible rationale to d'Aspremont
et al.'s ﬁnal open remark in their fundamental reexamination of
Hotelling's model (1929), according to which, contra Hotelling,
one should intuitively expect differentiation to be a distinctive
feature of oligopolistic competition. Oligopolists should indeed be
better off by dividing the markets into submarkets over which
they each exert quasi-monopolistic control. Our results actually
demonstrate that limited access to information, on the part of
consumers, can be an underlying factor and a prevailing one in
actual competitive markets that
induces a non-competitive
behavior from which ﬁrms, without prior explicit collusion, can
take advantage of the situation and establish local monopolies,
which are detrimental to consumers. Our results show that only
the use of a proﬁt DM decision rule precludes the formation of
such local monopolies.

Besides, the use of these decision rules allowed us to emphasize
heterogeneous behaviors. Thinking of these various behaviors in
terms of deviation from a rational behavior understood as the
maximization of a unique utility function would have prevented

us from making sense of this heterogeneity. In order to deﬁne our
decision rules, we measured whether our subjects looked for
maximizing their own proﬁt, whether they aimed at maximizing
the difference of proﬁts with their opponents, or ﬁnally whether
they tried to create a TC. The PM decision rule appears to be a
good predictor of the ﬁrms' aggregated behavior, while the other
decision rules offer an opportunity to account for less expected
behaviors.

The use of a DM decision rule indeed supported a ﬁerce
competition when informational structure opened the possibility
of quasi-monopolies. The use of this decision rule could be
explained by the presence of an underlying anchoring bias
(Tversky and Kahneman, 1974): as it is difﬁcult to evaluate the
success of a move per se, a move is considered efﬁcient if it leads
to beer proﬁts than its opponent. In other words, ﬁrms' strategy
evaluation relies on comparisons to a given point instead of an
evaluation in absolute terms. This could explain why this decision
rule has been promoted by the display of the opponent score. The
use of such decision rule could also be due to an underlying zero-
sum bias (Meegan, 2010; Różycka-Tran et al.,): considering
wrongfully that a greater proﬁt for its opponent is necessarily a
proﬁt loss for itself, a ﬁrm could decide to make its choice only
considering the proﬁt difference.

While DM decision rules are precluded under certain condi-
tions the formation of monopolies, the use of a TC decision rule

8

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

ARTICLE

Fig. 4 Analysis of dynamics. Comparison of the dynamics between artiﬁcial ﬁrms and human controlled ﬁrms. Each ﬁgure presents the evolution of
positions and prices of two ﬁrms in competition (orange: Firm A, blue: Firm B; data for artiﬁcial ﬁrms comes from a single simulation that serves as an
example of a typical behavior). a Left: artiﬁcial ﬁrms using a proﬁt maximization strategy; right: two participants with a high score in proﬁt maximization;
r = 0.25. b Same as in subﬁgure a but with r = 0.50. c Left: two ﬁrms using a difference maximization (DM) decision rule; two participants with a high
score in DM; r = 0.25. d Same as in subﬁgure c but with r = 0.50. e Left: two ﬁrms using a tacit collusion (TC) decision rule; right: two participants with a
high score in TC; r = 0.25. f Same as in subﬁgure e but with r = 0.50

allowed to relax price competition when information structure
was promoting it. As a means to avoid the drawbacks of a
competition situation leading to lower proﬁts, the use of such
decision rule could be explained by the search for a Pareto
optimality (Pareto, 1964) that is to say following the strategies
that lead to a distribution of proﬁts such as no ﬁrm could earn
more, otherwise it would be at the expense of the other. It could
also be interpreted as deliberate attempts to emit signals in order
to relax competition in a situation where the communication
technology needed to lead it rationally is lacking.

Another consideration that is raised by our study is that the
consequences of using such decision rules can differ from Nash
predictions applied to a basic Hotelling's model under full
information: for instance, the use of a TC decision rule under full
information leads to maximally differentiate while minimal dif-
ferentiation would be expected. However, it is now a well-trodden
theme that decision rules can be interpreted in terms of their
adaptive rationality (Gigerenzer and Reinhard, 2001). As long as a
chosen decision rule improves the outcome of the game and

corresponds to relatively stable observable spatial patterns, we can
speak of a speciﬁc form of rationality arising under the imposed
informational constraint. Work by Sutton (1997), applied to the
Hotelling's model, explores such an equilibrium notion and weak
rationality requirement, based in his case on a single decision
rule, which is to seize an opportunity when it presents itself. It
would take a further study to understand how the TC decision
rule highlighted here indeed constitutes an adaptive rational
behavior to informational constraints, either exerted on con-
sumers by means of the availability of information, or exerted on
ﬁrms by means of their disability to communicate.

For the purpose of our study, we considered a model with a
basic architecture. For instance, we used a homogeneous view
radius for consumers in our model, mainly for two reasons: (i) it
may have been more difﬁcult for the subjects to identify con-
sumers view radius and to adapt their behavior in consequence,
(ii) diminish the potential variability of our data. Besides, from a
more theoretical point of view, it is equivalent to consider con-
stant radius across the population of consumers as reciprocally

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

implementing the idea of a limited sphere of inﬂuence of the
ﬁrms. Given this limited amount of vision around consumers or
sphere of inﬂuence of ﬁrms (in the sense, then, of being visible by
consumers) it also motivates ﬁrms to try to change their location.
That being said, It might be relevant to implement heterogeneous
view radius in a further study, in order to test the robustness of
our results established in a homogeneous setting.

Another implication of our implementation of information is
that consumers may be unaware of one of the two options. The
unawareness of one of the two options is an abstraction for a
consumer that is not willing to inform himself. For instance, we
can mention emergency situations (keys lost, car break) where the
ﬁrst solution is picked without consideration of other options.
This type of partial attention or restriction to a “consideration
set” can also be seen as reﬂecting a form of incomplete preference
relation on the part of the consumers, which has been modeled in
different terms in the literature: top options (Rubinstein and
Salant, 2011) or consideration sets (Lleras et al., 2017).

they dispose of

Regarding the structure of ﬁrm decision-making, we think that
a turn-based strategy is more appropriate as it is more likely that
a human subject embodying a ﬁrm chooses a strategy in reaction
to a change of strategy from its competitor. When dealing with
rational agents, simultaneous decision-making is possible in the
sense that
information and unbounded
full
computational abilities, providing them the means to compute
the equilibrium and to play accordingly. As we set-up a human
subject experiment, we were expecting to deal with non-fully
rational agents that are unable to do so. Coordination on price or
location policies, leading to a typical situation of maximal/mini-
mal differentiation seems unlikely or at least much more difﬁcult
in this conﬁguration. Indeed, pure rationality models such as
required to deal with normal
forms or extensive forms in
experimental game-theory predict behavior to a lesser extent that
taking account the incremental feedback of players in repeated
sequential situations (Roth and Erev, 1995). We anticipated that
subjects will make use of decision rules, leading to more or less
stable situations—these decision rules play also the rules of
learning heuristics. Then, designing a turn-based game con-
stituted for us a way to facilitate the occurrence of such situations.
From a broader perspective, our results demonstrate interac-
tion effects between consumers and ﬁrms’ cognitions, that can
deeply impact market dynamics. It, therefore, creates an incentive
to think that duopoly regulation should incorporate insights from
incomplete markets due to agents limited cognitive abilities.
However, most of the focus has been put in behavioral industrial
organization to the irrationalities of clients rather than ﬁrms. We
donot consider our ﬁrms irrational either but as constrained to
ﬁnd decision rules in response to their own perception of the
consumers’ limited information about themselves. From a theo-
retical point of view, we are not the ﬁrst to envision such a
problem (Spiegler, 2006). However, the decision rules we stylize
and simulate can deﬁnitely provide incentives to a more beha-
viorally oriented approach to duopoly regulation.

Code and data availability
Simulations were implemented using Python and the Python
scientiﬁc stack (Jones et al., 2001; van der Walt et al., 2011;
Hunter, 2007). The code is available at https://github.com/
AurelienNioche/SpatialCompetition.
The software used for the experimental part of the study is based
on a client/server architecture. The client part was developed
using the Unity game engine, hosted on a dedicated server and
ran in the subjects' web browser using WebGL API. The code and
the assets are available at https://github.com/AurelienNioche/

DuopolyAssets. The experiment server was hosted on a dedicated
server and developed using the Django framework. The code of
the server part is available at https://github.com/AurelienNioche/
DuopolyDjango.
The
at https://github.com/
AurelienNioche/DuopolyAnalysis. Figures 3 and 4 were pro-
duced using raw data that are available at https://github.com/
AurelienNioche/DuopolyAnalysis.

analysis program is

available

Received: 26 September 2018 Accepted: 28 February 2019

References
Amir O, David GR, Yaakov KG (2012) Economic games on the internet: The effect of
$1 stakes. PLoS ONE 7(2):e31461. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0031461
Barreda-Tarrazona I, Aurora G-G, Nikolaos G, Joaquín A-F, Agustín G-S (2011)
An experiment on spatial competition with endogenous pricing. Int J Ind
Organ 29(1):74–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijindorg.2010.02.001

Brenner S (2005) Hotelling games with three, four, and more players. J Reg Sci 45

(4):851–64. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0022-4146.2005.00395.x

Brown S (1989) Harold hotelling and the principle of minimum differentiation.
Progress Human Geogr 13(4):471–93. https://doi.org/10.1177/03091325890
1300401

Buhrmester M, Tracy K, Samuel DG (2011) Amazons mechanical turk. Perspect

Psychol Sci 6(1):3–5. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691610393980

Cremer H, Maurice M, Jacques-François T (1991) Mixed oligopoly with differ-
entiated products. Int J Ind Organ 9(1):43–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-
7187(91)90004-5

d’Aspremont C, Jaskold Gabszewicz J, Thisse J-F (1979) On hotellings “stability in
competition”. Econometrica 47(5):1145. https://doi.org/10.2307/1911955
Dudey M (1990) Competition by choice: The effect of consumer search on ﬁrm
location decisions. Am Econ Rev 80(5):1092–1104. https://ideas.repec.org/a/
aea/aecrev/v80y1990i5p1092-1104.html

Eaton BC, Richard GL (1975) The principle of minimum differentiation recon-
sidered: Some new developments in the theory of spatial competition. Rev
Econ Stud 42(1):27. https://doi.org/10.2307/2296817

Economides N (1993) Hotelling’s “main street” with more than two competitors. J
Reg Sci 33(3):303–19. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9787.1993.tb00228.x
Gigerenzer G, Reinhard S (eds.) (2001). Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/bounded-rationality
Hotelling H (1929) Stability in competition. Econ J 39(153):41. https://doi.org/

10.2307/2224214

Huck S, Wieland M, Nicolaas JV (2002) The east end, the west end, and king’cross:
On clustering in the four-player hotelling game. Econ Inq 40(2):231–40.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ei/40.2.231

Hunter JD (2007) Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Comput Sci Eng 9

(3):90–95. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2007.55

Ipeirotis PG (2010) Demographics of mechanical turk. Ce-DER-10-01. New York
University, New York, NY, http://www.ipeirotis.com/wp-content/uploads/
2012/02/CeDER-10-01.pdf

Irmen A, Jacques-François T (1998) Competition in multi-characteristics spaces:
Hotelling was almost right. J Econ Theory 78(1):76–102. https://doi.org/
10.1006/jeth.1997.2348

Jones E, Travis O, Pearu P (2001) SciPy: Open source scientiﬁc tools for python.

http://www.scipy.org

Kahneman D (2003) A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded
rationality. Am Psychol 58(9):697–720. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.58.9.
697

Kephart C, Friedman D (2015) Hotelling revisits the lab: Equilibration in con-
tinuous and discrete time. J Econ Sci Assoc 1(2):132–45. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s40881-015-0009-z

Kruse JB, David JS (2000) Location, cooperation and communication: an experi-
mental examination. Int J Ind Organ 18(1):59–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/
s0167-7187(99)00034-x

Lleras JS, Masatlioglu Y, Nakajima D, Ozbay EY (2017) When more is less: Limited
consideration. J Econ Theory 170:70–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jet.2017.04.004
Loertscher S, Muehlheusser G (2011) Sequential location games. RAND J Econ 42

(4):639–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-2171.2011.00148.x

Meegan DV (2010) Zero-sum bias: perceived competition despite unlimited
resources. Front Psychol 1:191. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00191
Paolacci G, Jesse C, Panagiotis GI (2010) Running experiments on amazon
mechanical turk. Judgm Decis Mak 5(5):411–19 https://EconPapers.repec.
org/RePEc:jdm:journl:v:5:y:2010:i:5:p:411-419

10

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x

ARTICLE

Pareto V (1964). Cours d’économie Politique. vol 1. Librairie Droz. https://www.
cairn.info/cours-d-economie-politique-tomes-1-et-2--9782600040143.htm
Prescott EC, Visscher M (1977) Sequential location among ﬁrms with foresight.

Bell J Econ 8(2):378. https://doi.org/10.2307/3003293

Różycka-Tran J, Paweł B, Bogdan W (2015) Belief in a zero-sum game as a social
axiom: A 37-nation study. J Cross-Cult Psychol 46(4):525–48. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0022022115572226

Roth AE, Erev I (1995) Learning in extensive-form games: Experimental data and
simple dynamic models in the intermediate term. Games Econ Behav 8
(1):164–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0899-8256(05)80020-X

Rothschild A (1947) Price theory and oligopoly. Econ J 57(227):299–320. https://

doi.org/10.2307/2225674

Rubinstein A (1991) Comments on the interpretation of game theory. Econome-

trica 59(4):909–924. https://doi.org/10.2307/2938166

Rubinstein A, Salant Y (2011) Eliciting welfare preferences from behavioural data
sets. Rev Econ Stud 79(1):375–387. https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdr024
Schultz C (2009) Transparency and product variety. Econ Lett 102(3):165–68.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2008.12.008

Spiegler R (2006) Competition over agents with boundedly rational expectations.
Theor Econ 1(2):207–231. https://econtheory.org/ojs/index.php/te/article/
viewArticle/20060207

Stahl K (1982) Differentiated products, consumer search, and locational oligopoly.

J Ind Econ 31(1/2):97. https://doi.org/10.2307/2098007

Stigler GJ (1961) The economics of information. J Political Econ 69(3):213–25.

https://doi.org/10.1086/258464

Sutton J (1997) One smart agent. RAND J Econ 28(4):605. https://doi.org/10.2307/

2555778

Thaler R (1980) Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. J Econ Behav Organ

1(1):39–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2681(80)90051-7

Tversky A, Kahneman D (1974) Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Science 185(4157):1124–31. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.185.4157.1124
van der Walt S, Colbert SC, Gaël V (2011) The NumPy array: A structure for
efﬁcient numerical computation. Comput Sci Eng 13(2):22–30. https://doi.
org/10.1109/mcse.2011.37

Webber MJ (1972) The impact of uncertainty upon location. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/impact-uncertainty-location

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-16-CE38-
0003). The funders had no role in study design, data collection, and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication.

Author contributions
AN and BG wrote the code, performed the experiments and the data analysis; AN, BG,
TB, NR, and SB-G designed the study and co-wrote the manuscript.

Additional information
Supplementary information: The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1057/
s41599-019-0241-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized
users.

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Reprints and permission information is available online at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2019

PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | 

 (2019) 5:33 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0241-x | www.nature.com/palcomms

11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
