Which Input Abstraction is Better for a Robot Syntax
Acquisition Model? Phonemes, Words or Grammatical
Constructions?
Xavier Hinaut

To cite this version:

Xavier Hinaut. Which Input Abstraction is Better for a Robot Syntax Acquisition Model? Phonemes,
Words or Grammatical Constructions?. 2018 Joint IEEE International Conference on Development
and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL-EpiRob), Sep 2018, Tokyo, Japan. ￿hal-01889919v2￿

HAL Id: hal-01889919

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01889919v2

Submitted on 3 Jan 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Which Input Abstraction is Better
for a Robot Syntax Acquisition Model?
Phonemes, Words or Grammatical Constructions?

Xavier Hinaut
Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France.
LaBRI, UMR 5800, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, Université de Bordeaux, France.
Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, CNRS, Université de Bordeaux, France.
xavier.hinaut@inria.fr

Abstract—There has been a considerable progress these last
years in speech recognition systems [13]. The word recognition
error rate went down with the arrival of deep learning methods.
However, if one uses cloud-based speech API and integrates it in-
side a robotic architecture [33], one still encounters considerable
cases of wrong sentences recognition. Thus speech recognition
can not be considered as solved especially when an utterance is
considered in isolation of its context. Particular solutions, that can
be adapted to different Human-Robot Interaction applications
and contexts, have to be found. In this perspective, the way
children learn language and how our brains process utterances
may help us improve how robot process language. Getting
inspiration from language acquisition theories and how the brain
processes sentences we previously developed a neuro-inspired
model of sentence processing. In this study, we investigate how
this model can process different levels of abstractions as input:
sequences of phonemes, sequences of words or grammatical
constructions. We see that even if the model was only tested
on grammatical constructions before, it has better performances
with words and phonemes inputs.

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Robots as models to study language acquisition

Robots are interesting for studying language in many per-
spectives. Some of the long lasting questions are, for instance
how languages evolve or emerge [27], [28], how language
or symbols in general could be grounded [14], [26] or how
the linguistic or non-linguistic symbols may emerge from
grounding [31]. In particular, one may be interested to have
a robot able to mix vision and dialog interaction in order
to grasp some objects in
to vocally command the robot
complex environments [1], [15], [32]. However, even if some
of these systems provide some transparency on how they
work1, they rarely help to understand how our brain processes
languages or how children could acquire one. Developmental
architectures [12], [19] are inspired from children development
and do not require to have all (vocabulary or syntactic) abilities
preﬁxed since the beginning of the learning period. Some stud-
ies have used different cognitively inspired frameworks with
robotics, such as Embodied Construction Grammar [8] and

construction grammar [12], [25]. Our brains process utterances
in a robust fashion in a variety of contexts: we believe that
the lack of brain-inspiration in these systems results in a gap
of robustness with human performance. In our approach, we
try to build an architecture that is able to tackle several of
these points and get a step closer to the understanding of
brain processes, language developmental strategies and symbol
grounding.

B. Our question and hypothesis

Considering a system that learns to parse a sentence given
a stream of inputs, one question is what is the optimal
level of abstraction of the inputs2: phonemes, words or
grammatical constructions?

Here, we only compare purely symbolic input representation
and do not consider raw acoustic signals or distributed repre-
sentation of coding, such as word embedding. In particular we
want also to see the robustness to noise of these different
representations. This is particularly important when such a
system is used with real speech signals, and have to deal with
the misrecognition of words. We previously started a step in
that direction by enabling the model to generalize on sentences
with unknown (or unrecognized) words [18].

C. Broca sentence parsing model

The neural parser proposes to model how the human brain
processes sentences and is inspired from several studies in neu-
roscience [5], [16]. A schema of how the global architecture
is and how inputs are processed can be seen on Figure 1.

The model is an analogy to a sub part of Broca’s area (a
region of prefrontal cortex, involved for instance in syntax
processing) and the striatum (a subpart of the basal ganglia).
Both are generally involved in sequence processing and learn-
ing, and in particular in sentence parsing.

Because there are probably as many neuro-inspired models
as the number of modellers, we want
to make clear our
claims about this neuro-plausibility and give some high-level

1For instance, when they do not include multiple ad hoc “hacks” to make

2Given a particular corpus, because one could assume that this could change

them work in the desired experimental conditions

on the size and complexity of the corpus.

Fig. 1. Sentence parsing model with different input conditions. The
system processes inputs as follows: (top left) from a sentence as input, the
model outputs (middle right) an action command that can be performed by
a robot. The processing of the sentence is sequential: each symbol of the
sequence (phoneme, word, ...) is given one at a time as a one-hot encoding.
The ﬁnal thematic roles for each SW is read-out at the end of the sentence
(but partial predictions can be read-out when the parsing is on-going). Before
entering the neural network, the sentence is preprocessed depending on the
main condition (PHON, WORD or CONST) and on the optional condition
(INF and/or NOISE). Semantic Words (nouns, verbs, ...) are replaced by a SW
symbol. Infrequent function words (IWs) are replaced by the & symbol. Here,
the input layer only represents word symbols, but in the PHON condition
these are replaced by phonemes. Example of input sequences for different
conditions can be seen in Figure 2. Figure modiﬁed from [18].

information about our model in order to easily compare it with
other models:

• the computations rely on distributed units (leaky average

ﬁring rate neurons),

• these computations are generic and not hand- or
task-designed3 contrary to some models (e.g. Bayesian)4:
there is no task a priori applied on the computations,
• it processes a sentence word by word instead of taking
the whole sentence in one shot or as a bag of words5,
• it is an anytime algorithm: it can give partial results (i.e.

predictions) before the end of a sentence,

• it can be trained in one-shot [16] or incrementally with

a Hebbian learning rule6,

• the learning algorithm does not unfold time contrary
to the Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT) algo-
rithm [35], [36],

• we do not use a speciﬁc framework for language, on
is based on the general Reservoir

the contrary it
Computing (RC) paradigm,

• this RC paradigm is inspired from neuroscience and
recently inspired neurobiologists in return: e.g. how to

3In particular, the computations performed in the input and recurrent layers.
4Only input and outputs units are encoded with localist (i.e. one-hot)
symbols, but there is no reason to think that a distributed coding should make
the model work differently. Because each symbol given as input is already
subject to a random projection.

5Like a spoken sentence which comes like a ﬂow and is available only
once: once has to rely on working memory to keep the information about the
whole sentence.

6X. Hinaut and S. Wermter, “An incremental approach to language acquisi-
tion: Thematic role assignment with echo state networks,” in Proc. of ICANN
2014, pp. 33–40.

Fig. 2. Symbol sequences given as input to the neural network depending
on the conditions. The same sentence (see 2nd line, WORD condition) is
given as input in order to see the effect of the different conditions. In PHON
cond., a sequence of phonemes is inputed into the network using CMU’s
dictionary representation: e.g. point is replaced by the sequence of symbols
“P, OY1, N, T”. In CONST cond., semantic words are replaced by a SW
symbol. In INF cond., infrequent words are replaced by “&” symbol: here,
then is replaced by “&”. In NOISE cond., 5% of the words are randomly
replaced by another one: here, and is replaced by put.

decode electrophysiological activity in the prefrontal cor-
tex of a monkey7.

Several models of sentence acquisition, comprehension or
production have been designed [12], in particular models based
on neural networks [3], [4], [7], [9]–[11], [23]). However,
to our knowledge none of such models combine all these
properties, even if not based on RC paradigm. More infor-
mation about previous versions of the model available in
supplementary materials8.

D. How to deal with Out-of-Vocabulary words?

In a developmental perspective it is important, for a child
or a robot, to be able to deal with unknown words. Even
if they do not need to infer their meaning yet. In such a
developmental approach it
is also interesting to not only
rely on a ﬁxed vocabulary, but on an evolving one [19]. In
speech recognition and natural language processing (NLP) in
general, some processed words may be unknown: i.e. not in
the vocabulary list of the processing system. Theses words are
called Out-of-vocabulary (OOV), and are often represented by
the marker UNK for unknown. How to deal with these OOV
words is a well-known problem in the ﬁeld [21]. One can use
ad hoc and hand-crafted tricks to deal with such a problem,
which seems often the case in HRI, even if not explicitly
stated in the papers. On the contrary, we take advantage of
the generalization properties of our neural architecture and
incorporate the fact that a word was not recognized instead of
discarding it (see subsection II-E and [18] for more details).

II. METHODS

A. Echo State Networks (ESN)

The neural parser is based on an ESN [20]: a particular
kind of recurrent neural network (RNN) in which inputs are
projected to a random recurrent layer, and only the output
layer (called the “read-out”) is modiﬁed by learning.

7Neuroscience studies borrowed this idea of decoding non-linear and high-

dimensional computations through time.

8Supplementary material and source code are available at https://github.

com/neuronalX/Hinaut2018\_icdl-epirob

The units of the recurrent neural network have a leak
rate (α) which corresponds to the inverse of a time constant.
These equations deﬁne the update of the ESN:

x(t + 1) = (1 − α)x(t) + αf (Winu(t + 1) + Wx(t)) (1)

TABLE I
SOME SENTENCE EXAMPLES FROM THE NOISY ENGLISH CORPUS.
DIFFERENT TYPE OF SENTENCES ARE GIVEN: 1. SEQUENCE OF ACTIONS
2. IMPLICIT REFERENCE TO VERB 3. IMPLICIT REFERENCE TO VERB AND
OBJECT 4. CROSSED REFERENCE 5. REPEATED ACTION 6. UNLIKELY
ACTION 7. PARTICULAR FW

y(t) = Woutx(t)

(2)

TYPE

SENTENCE EXAMPLE

where u(t), x(t) and y(t) are the input, the reservoir (i.e.
hidden) state and the read-out (i.e. output) states respectively
at time t. α is the leak rate. Win , W and Wout are the
input, the reservoir, and the read-out matrices respectively.
f is the tanh activation function. After the collection of all
reservoir states, the following equation deﬁnes how the read-
out (i.e. output) weights are trained. In order to prevent from
overﬁtting9, we use ridge regression (also known as regression
with Tikhonov regularization), which probably provides the
most stable solution in this context [22]:

Wout = YdXT(XXT + βI)−1

(3)

where Yd is the concatenation of the desired outputs, X is
the concatenation of the reservoir states (over all time steps
for all trained sentences), β is the regularization coefﬁcient
(called ridge in the remaining of the paper) and MT is the
transpose of matrix M.

B. Corpus

The corpus was obtained by asking naive users (agnostic
about how the system works) to watch several actions in a
video and give the commands corresponding to the motor
actions performed, as if they wanted a robot to perform the
same action. The video used is available online with the ﬁrst
experiments we did with robots [17]. Five users were recruited
and each user provided 38 commands: this gives a total of
190 sentences. Note that some sentences provided by users
are complex and some times probably ungrammatical (see
Table I).

C. Experiments

Based on a previously developed neural parser model [16],
[18] we enhanced it in order to make it able to process a given
sentence at three different levels of abstraction:

• sequence of phonemes (PHON)
• sequences of words (WORD)
• grammatical construction (CONST)

From these three kinds of inputs we deﬁne the three
different conditions of our experiments. All inputs are given
symbol by symbol, in a one-hot (localist) encoding. Please
refer to the supplementary materials and to [16], [18] in order
to have more details on the model.

9For the current data set, the optimal number of neurons is approximately
of 160, 280 and 300 neurons for the WORD, CONST and PHON conditions.
Thus we need to regularize if we want to use more units in the reservoir (i.e.
500).

1
1
2
3
4
5
5
6
7

touch the circle after having pushed the cross to the left
put the cross on the left side and after grasp the circle
move the circle to the left then the cross to the middle
put ﬁrst the triangle on the middle and after on the left
push the triangle and the circle on the middle
hit twice the blue circle
grasp the circle two times
put the cross to the right and do a u-turn
put both the circle and the cross to the right

D. Details on the Phoneme Extension of the Model

In the case of PHON condition, we extended the model [16]
to process directly sequence of phonemes instead of sequence
of words. Each word is replaced by its corresponding list of
phonemes based on the Carnegie Mellon University word-
phoneme correspondence dictionary (CMUdict v0.07)10. No
additional space or any other clue enabling the model to detect
boundary of words was added. Each sentence is then encoded
as a succession of input unit activations in a localist (i.e. one-
hot) encoding: 1 for the corresponding phoneme, and 0 for
others. The outputs are generated as in the previous model,
as if the grammatical constructions were processed. Thus, the
model has no simple cue indicating that a semantic word is
being processed (i.e. activation of the SW input unit, as it is
the case in the previous model).

E. Infrequent symbols category

For the sequence of words (WORD) and grammatical con-
struction (CONST) inputs we also add a condition where we
replace infrequent words by an “&” marker in order to see if
this enables better generalization. Before training, we simply
replace the most
infrequent words in the training corpus.
We count the number of occurrences of the words in the
training corpus and deﬁne a threshold θ (θ = 5). The words
that have a lower number of occurrences are replaced by an
Infrequent Word (IW) marker “&”. This enables our system
to smartly process unknown words during test phase [18]. The
idea behind is the following: the reservoir is trained to have
such IW markers at different positions inside sentences, thus
enabling it to not “freak out” when an unknown word appears.
This word replacement was not used in the PHON condition
for several reasons:

• if we use phonemes we may not have access to word
recognition, so the problem of misrecognizing a word
does not exists in this case.

• although it could help, the aim is to assess if relying on

PHON without speech recognition is possible.

10Available at http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict

F. Dealing with noisy inputs

As we are interested in the performance in real world
scenarios of this neural parser, we would like the system to
be able to handle and recover from speech recognition errors.
In Human-Robot Interaction studies, it is common that this
issue is not considered (badly recognized sentences are just
discarded) or ad hoc methods are applied (e.g. researchers
write by hand a correspondence dictionary in order replace
words that are phonetically close to the desired ones). Even
using mainstream APIs, such as the Google Speech API,
doesn’t prevent this issue (i.e. several words are not correctly
recognized) from occurring in many sentences. Such APIs
seem to be optimized for web searches, etc., but not for
HRI vocabulary. Twiefel et al. [33], [34] have been able to
enhance the results from Google API by post-processing its
results: by decomposing the sentences obtained in sequences
of phonemes and then ﬁnding the most probable sentence
based on Levenshtein distance. Although the performances of
the robotic architecture tested in these studies provide robust
results, even in the presence of signiﬁcant ambient noise11,
we want to enable the core part of the architecture (i.e. the
recurrent network) to be intrinsically more robust.

G. Training and testing

For all but noisy experiment conditions, we did a 10-fold
cross-validation. For all experiments we averaged over 50
instances12. In order to evaluate the performance, we record
the activity of the read-out layer at the last time step, which
is when the ﬁnal dot is given as input. We ﬁrst discard the
activations that are below a threshold of 0.5. Finally, if there
are several possible roles for a particular SW, we do a winner-
take-all and keep the role unit with the highest activation.

More implementation details on the training and testing
procedures, about simulating noisy speech, and about hyper-
parameters are available in the supplementary materials

III. RESULTS

A. Phonemes, words or grammatical constructions?

In Table II are presented the overall results for all the
condition combinations. For PHON, WORD and CONST
conditions, we obtain generalization errors of 18.49% (+1.76),
18.12% (+1.38) and 21.46% (+1.41) respectively. If we add
the option of replacing infrequent words13, error for WORD
and CONST decrease to 16.51% (+1.26) and 17.71% (+1.49)
respectively14. In Table II, one can see that
the result of
(PHON, default) condition have been pasted in the (PHON,
INF) condition, this is because there is no need to consider
infrequent words in the PHON cond.

11We successfully tested the system in a crowded noisy environment, Night

of Science in Hamburg in fall 2015.

12Erratum: in a previous version of the paper, it was erroneously written
100 instances instead of 50. This does not affect the results and order between
the results. This can be checked with the code published online.

13i.e. occurring less than ﬁve times in the data set
14We outperformed previously obtained results from [17] and [18] that were

applied only on CONST.

From these results we conclude that in general conditions
(without word replacement), the WORD condition (i.e. se-
quence of words) performs better than the two other condi-
tions, although the improvement of performance is not striking.
It is surprising that the condition using phonemes has a very
close performance although it processes more complex inputs
with the same reservoir size: the inputs streams are longer,
and there is no cue indicating the boundaries between words.
We can also notice that replacing infrequent words helps the
WORD, and particularly the CONST, conditions to improve
generalization. Therefore this option (of replacing infrequent
words) should be used by robotic systems confronted to OOV
words.

Additionally to the global hyper-parameter (HP) search,
for each condition we made a HP search in order to select
the optimal regularization coefﬁcient for each condition using
hyperopt with TPE (Tree of Parzen Estimators) algorithm [2]
for a hundred evaluations15. Surprisingly PHON and WORD
conditions have a similar optimal ridge parameter (2.5e-
04), compared to CONST condition (5e-06). Although, from
the landscape formed by the parameter exploration: WORD
condition has its best values around the optimal ridge with
much worse performances for other ridge values, and PHON
condition has similar performances when the ridge has a lower
value (i.e. less regularization). Due to this landscape, we could
speculate that PHON condition is less prone to overﬁtting than
WORD condition.

We performed additional experiments (available in supple-
mentary materials) in order to (1) explore whether adding a
feedback connection from the output units to the reservoir
could improve the performance, and to (2) explore how the
number of neurons inside the reservoir inﬂuence the perfor-
mance of the three main conditions.

B. Tasks difﬁculty

In order to evaluate if each condition was of the same
difﬁculty - in a different manner than evaluating purely gen-
eralization performance -, we did a supplementary parameter
exploration. We did a TPE search changing only the number
of neurons inside the reservoir without using regularization,
i.e. we simply use the pseudo inverse [22] instead of ridge
regression. We did this search with the infrequent word
replacement option for WORD and CONST conditions. For
the current data set, the optimal number of neurons are of
approximately of 160, 280 and 300 neurons for the WORD,
CONST and PHON conditions respectively. If we assume the
optimal number of neurons (when no regularization is applied)
is representative of task difﬁculty16, then we could conclude
that the WORD condition is easier than CONST and PHON
condition. Thus it is somehow “unfair” to compare the three

15The ideal ridge regularization coefﬁcient is told to be dependent on each
reservoir instance. However we prefer to use a general value a priori which
is more useful for applications.

16Of course this is also tightly linked to overﬁtting problems. Another
parameter search by changing the ridge actually indicates that WORD
condition is much more sensitive to ridge parameter than the PHON condition.

TABLE II
MEAN ERROR IN PERCENT (AND STANDARD DEVIATION) FOR FULL
SENTENCE COMPREHENSION FOR DIFFERENT CONDITIONS.

conditions with a number of reservoir units ﬁxed to 500, and
not allowing CONST and PHON to have more reservoir units
as the tasks seem more difﬁcult17.

C. Noisy speech recognition

Results in Table II show that adding noisy input affect the
performances18, although they do not dramatically fall. For the
PHON condition we pass from an error of 18.49% (+1.76) to
33.11% (+0.77); for WORD from 18.12% (+1.38) to 29.73%
(+0.48); for CONST from 21.46% (+1.41) to 40.53% (+0.77).
Interestingly the noise do not affect the three conditions in the
same way. The CONST condition is the most affected by noisy
inputs. This could be explained by the fact that the system
could only rely on function words to parse the sentence. PHON
condition is bit more affected than the WORD condition.
Further explorations would be necessary to understand if this
comes from the hyper-parameters that could be optimized
the way the noisy condition
speciﬁcally or not. Actually,
is designed is “unfair” to the PHON condition, because if
phonemes are used as input one would expect to have noise
on the phonemes and not on the whole words.

IV. DISCUSSION

Considering a system that learns to parse a sentence given a
stream of inputs, we answered the question what could be the
optimal level of abstraction of the inputs (phonemes, words or
grammatical constructions) given a particular English corpus
of robot commands provided by users. This optimal input
abstraction may be different for other corpora, in particular
if they are of different size. In this study, we only compared
purely symbolic input representations and do not consider
raw acoustic signals or distributed encoding representations,
such as word embedding. Although we have unpublished
results showing that our system is able to process words with
word2vec representation [24] (a particular kind of embedding),
we did not focus on it in this study19.

One could argue that comparing different levels of abstrac-
tion is probably more relevant to a neuro-cognitive robot than
to a child: because in order to represent words she needs to
chunk phonemes, and to have constructions she should chunk
groups of words and identify some words as being variables

17Effect of reservoir size is discussed in supplementary materials.
18All results were averaged over 50 instances.
19We did not focus on such representations in order to keep the comparison
between levels of symbolic abstraction only. Otherwise we should also have
compared it with embedding for phonemes and for grammatical constructions.

(e.g. semantic words). However, this study tries to understand
what kind of information in the inputs are most relevant for a
robot to learn to parse sentences.

In a nutshell, this study raise the question whether pro-
cessing sentences as sequence of words (WORD condition)
is always optimal or not. This assumption is often made
by default in HRI experiments, but this may depend on the
context. Our results suggest that the little advantage of a
particular kind of input could change for slightly different
conditions or corpora20.

A ﬁrst remark on the results is that we outperformed previ-
ous results obtained on the same corpus in CONST condition:
here we obtain 17.71% (+1.49) instead of 21.4% (+2.2) in
previous study [18] using the same number of reservoir units.
Results showed that WORD condition (i.e. sequence of words)
is the one performing best in normal conditions, but only from
a short increase in performance. It remains to be explored
whether these results depend on the training dataset and on
its size. In particular, we speculate that the CONST condition
is not performing well because the user-based corpus is small
and contains a lot of sentence variants to say similar things
(e.g. see Table I). Thus,
in the CONST cond.
doesn’t have enough repetitions of these sentence variants in
order to robustly generalize only on grammatical constructions
(i.e. sentence templates). Conversely, in the WORD cond.
the model can rely on the precise semantic words used in a
sentence as supplementary cues to help generalization: which
explains the better generalization of WORD over CONST for
this small corpus.

the model

Surprisingly the PHON cond. performs nearly as well as
the WORD cond.
in default experiments. The task seems
more difﬁcult in the PHON cond. because the network has
to deal with longer time scales and no word segmentation is
provided. We believe the PHON condition would also beneﬁt
from a bigger corpus enabling the network to extract more
statistical regularities from phoneme sequences. Thus, we aim
to repeat the experiment on a much larger corpus in order to
demonstrate better performance in both PHON and CONST
experiments.

We also explored noisy conditions, where 5% of the words
were randomly replaced by other words. WORD and PHON
conditions resisted better to noise than CONST condition;
with WORD cond. maintaining its leadership. However, more
realistic noisy conditions21 could be obtained by randomly
replace/insert/delete phonemes: we speculate that with such
noise design the PHON condition would outperform the two
other conditions. Consequently, we will extend this work to the
processing of sequences and phonemes provided by a speech
recognizer such as DeepSpeech [13]: this will provide more

20We did not perform statistical comparisons between the different condi-
tions because such tests are likely to not have enough statistical power given
the size of the corpus

21More realistic noisy conditions could be obtained with a speech recog-
nizer giving access to the sub-word information (i.e. phonemes recognized),
instead of Google speech API for instance.

realistic phoneme/word recognition errors, and supposedly
favor the PHON condition.

Despite the small corpus used, the current performances
are already interesting and useful for small corpus applica-
tions in Human-Robot Interaction experiments. Because the
core part of the model is a generic neural architecture, it
could be easily reused or adapted for other computational
or robotic experiments in language acquisition. In particular,
we would like to extend this work by integrating our neural
parser with multi-modal (e.g. vision, sensori-motor, ...) and
behavioral robotic experiments [6]. For instance, the semantic
and syntactic information of such complex sentences could
be integrated into robotic experiments grounding linguistic
symbols to robot behavior and to the visual modality [29],
[30], [37]. Syntactic richness of natural language sentences
are often simpliﬁed in such experiments (for the beneﬁt of
motor or visual modalities), and rather rely on stereotypical
sequence of few semantic words without function words (e.g.
“hit left blue”). Our model could help in such architectures by
increase the syntactic variability a robotic architecture could
deal with.

Supplementary material and source code are available at

https://github.com/neuronalX/Hinaut2018\_icdl-epirob

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The author would like to thank Bhargav Teja Nallapu for
valuable feedback on the paper, and Johannes Twiefel for
interesting discussions.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Bastianelli, G. Castellucci, D. Croce, R. Basili, and D. Nardi,
“Effective and robust natural language understanding for human-robot
interaction.” in ECAI, 2014, pp. 57–62.

[2] J. Bergstra, D. Yamins, and D. D. Cox, “Hyperopt: A python library
for optimizing the hyperparameters of machine learning algorithms,” in
Proceedings of the 12th Python in Science Conference, 2013, pp. 13–20.
[3] H. Brouwer, M. W. Crocker, N. J. Venhuizen, and J. C. Hoeks, “A
neurocomputational model of the n400 and the p600 in language
processing,” Cognitive science, vol. 41, pp. 1318–1352, 2017.

[4] F. Chang, “Symbolically speaking: A connectionist model of sentence
production,” Cognitive science, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 609–651, 2002.
[5] P. Dominey, M. Hoen, and T. Inui, “A neurolinguistic model of gram-
matical construction processing,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 2088–2107, 2006.

[6] P. F. Dominey and J.-D. Boucher, “Developmental stages of perception
and language acquisition in a perceptually grounded robot,” Cognitive
Systems Research, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 243–259, 2005.

[7] J. Elman, “Finding structure in time,” Cognitive science, vol. 14, no. 2,

pp. 179–211, 1990.

[8] M. Eppe, S. Trott, and J. Feldman, “Exploiting deep semantics and
compositionality of natural language for human-robot-interaction,” in
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2016 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on.

IEEE, 2016, pp. 731–738.

[9] S. L. Frank, “Strong systematicity in sentence processing by an echo
state network,” in International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Net-
works. Springer, 2006, pp. 505–514.

[10] S. L. Frank, W. F. Haselager, and I. van Rooij, “Connectionist semantic

systematicity,” Cognition, vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 358–379, 2009.

[11] S. L. Frank, P. Monaghan, and C. Tsoukala, “Neural network models of
language acquisition and processing,” Preprint: stefanfrank.info, 2017.
[12] J. Gaspers, P. Cimiano, K. Rohlﬁng, and B. Wrede, “Constructing a
language from scratch: Combining bottom–up and top–down learning
processes in a computational model of language acquisition,” IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 183–196, 2017.

[13] A. Hannun et al., “Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recog-

nition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567, 2014.

[14] S. Harnad, “The symbol grounding problem,” Physica D: Nonlinear

Phenomena, vol. 42, no. 1-3, pp. 335–346, 1990.

[15] J. Hatori et al., “Interactively picking real-world objects with
preprint

instructions,”

language

arXiv

unconstrained
spoken
arXiv:1710.06280, 2017.

[16] X. Hinaut and P. Dominey, “Real-time parallel processing of grammati-
cal structure in the fronto-striatal system: a recurrent network simulation
study using reservoir computing,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 2, p. e52946,
2013.

[17] X. Hinaut, M. Petit, G. Pointeau, and P. Dominey, “Exploring the
acquisition and production of grammatical constructions through human-
robot interaction with echo state networks,” Frontiers in Neurorobotics,
vol. 8, 2014.

[18] X. Hinaut, J. Twiefel, M. Petit, P. F. Dominey, and S. Wermter, “A
recurrent neural network for multiple language acquisition: Starting with
english and french,” in NIPS 2015 Workshop on Cognitive Computation:
Integrating Neural and Symbolic Approaches, 2015.

[19] N. Iwahashi, “Robots that

learn language: Developmental approach
to human-machine conversations,” in Symbol Grounding and beyond.
Springer, 2006, pp. 143–167.

[20] H. Jaeger, “The “echo state” approach to analysing and training recurrent
neural networks,” Bonn, Germany: German National Research Center
for Information Technology GMD Tech. Report, vol. 148, p. 34, 2001.
[21] D. Jurafsky and J. Martin, Speech and Language Processing: An In-
troduction to Natural Language Processing, Computational Linguistics,
and Speech Recognition., 2nd ed. Pearson International, 2009.
[22] M. Lukoševiˇcius, “A practical guide to applying echo state networks,”
in Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade. Springer, 2012, pp. 659–686.
[23] R. Miikkulainen, “Subsymbolic case-role analysis of sentences with
embedded clauses,” Cognitive Science, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 47–73, 1996.
[24] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their composi-
tionality,” in Proc. of NIPS, 2013, pp. 3111–3119.

[25] M. Panzner, J. Gaspers, and P. Cimiano, “Learning linguistic construc-
tions grounded in qualitative action models,” in Robot and Human
Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), 2015 24th IEEE International
Symposium on.

IEEE, 2015, pp. 121–127.

[26] D. K. Roy, “Learning visually grounded words and syntax for a scene
description task,” Computer speech & language, vol. 16, no. 3-4, pp.
353–385, 2002.

[27] M. Spranger and L. Steels, “Emergent functional grammar for space,”
Experiments in Cultural Language Evolution, vol. 3, pp. 207–232, 2012.
[28] L. Steels, “The synthetic modeling of language origins,” Evolution of

communication, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 1997.

[29] F. Stramandinoli, D. Marocco, and A. Cangelosi, “The grounding of
higher order concepts in action and language: a cognitive robotics
model,” Neural Networks, vol. 32, pp. 165–173, 2012.

[30] Y. Sugita and J. Tani, “Learning semantic combinatoriality from the
interaction between linguistic and behavioral processes,” Adaptive be-
havior, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 33–52, 2005.

[31] T. Taniguchi, T. Nagai, T. Nakamura, N. Iwahashi, T. Ogata, and
H. Asoh, “Symbol emergence in robotics: a survey,” Advanced Robotics,
vol. 30, no. 11-12, pp. 706–728, 2016.

[32] M. Tenorth and M. Beetz, “Knowrob: A knowledge processing in-
frastructure for cognition-enabled robots,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 566–590, 2013.

[33] J. Twiefel, T. Baumann, S. Heinrich, and S. Wermter, “Improv-
ing domain-independent cloud-based speech recognition with domain-
dependent phonetic post-processing,” in Twenty-Eighth AAAI. Québec
City, Canada, 2014, pp. 1529–1535.

[34] J. Twiefel, X. Hinaut, M. Borghetti, E. Strahl, and S. Wermter, “Using
Natural Language Feedback in a Neuro-inspired Integrated Multimodal
Robotic Architecture,” in Proc. of RO-MAN, New York City, USA, 2016.
[35] P. Werbos, “Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do
it,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 78, no. 10, pp. 1550–1560, 1990.
[36] P. J. Werbos, “Beyond regression: New tools for prediction and analysis
in the behavioral sciences.” Ph. D. thesis. Harvard University, Cam-
bridge, MA., 1974.

[37] T. Yamada, S. Murata, H. Arie, and T. Ogata, “Dynamical integration of
language and behavior in a recurrent neural network for human–robot
interaction,” Frontiers in neurorobotics, vol. 10, p. 5, 2016.

