Cognitive Architecture and Software Environment for
the Design and Experimentation of Survival Behaviors
in Artificial Agents
Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Frédéric Alexandre. Cognitive Architecture and Software Environment for the
Design and Experimentation of Survival Behaviors in Artificial Agents. IJCCI 2018 - 10th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Computational Intelligence, Sep 2018, Seville, Spain. ￿hal-01931497￿

HAL Id: hal-01931497

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01931497

Submitted on 22 Nov 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Cognitive Architecture and Software Environment for the Design and
Experimentation of Survival Behaviors in Artiﬁcial Agents

Bhargav Teja Nallapu1,2,3 and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre1,2,3
1INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200 Avenue de la Vieille Tour, 33405 Talence, France
2LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, Talence, France
3IMN, Universit´e de Bordeaux, CNRS, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France
{bhargav.teja-nallapu, frederic.alexandre}@inria.fr

Keywords:

Cognitive Architecture, Cerebral Systems, Survival.

Abstract:

We discuss here the characteristics of a software environment appropriate for the development of a bio-inspired
cognitive architecture, which can emulate the behavior of autonomous intelligent agents. First, it is reminded
that, while the focus is often set on the more abstract aspects of cognitive abilities, studying the fundamental
bases of intelligence that allow for autonomy is a prerequisite for well deﬁned intelligent systems. Secondly,
we highlight functional loops associating cerebral structures including the basal ganglia in the brain of most
species along the evolution. They are dedicated to the organization of behavior under the constraint of rein-
forcement, corresponding in their simplest expression to the selection of action for survival. Lastly, concerning
the simulation of such models, we describe a software environment to study such relations in a more controlled
way than hardware implementations, by adapting a platform built on the top of a video game for the develop-
ment of classical artiﬁcial intelligence models. We explain here how our neuronal model exhibits bodily and
internal characteristics necessary for survival tasks and how these characteristics are plugged in the simulation
platform. Some scenarios of survival are reported as an illustration of this environment.

1 INTRODUCTION

Autonomous behavior and ability to survive forms a
key prerequisite for any cognitive agent. High level
cognitive agents, on the other hand, are often char-
acterized to solve speciﬁc complex problems while
their capacities to survive and evolve autonomously
are often disregarded. We describe a bio-inspired ap-
proach that (i) forms the basis of understanding these
capacities and (ii) deﬁnes the characteristics of a soft-
ware environment in which the problem of survival is
demonstrated using a virtual agent.

From a simple organism such as C-elegans with
302 neurons to a human brain with billions of neu-
rons, the changes that led to more complex behavior
are quite challenging to understand. So is extracting
the invariants that underlie the survival capacities of
these species. Within this scope, at all stages of phy-
logeny, two processes can be mentioned: signaling
and regulation. The ﬁrst indicates that, by various
means, the organism is informed about the state of
the environment and its own (bodily and mental) state.
The second emphasizes that the organism has differ-
ent ways (motor, chemical, decisional) of responding

to adapt (its body and mental analysis) to the situa-
tion. These processes are central in the concept of au-
topoiesis introduced by (Maturana and Varela, 1991),
as the property of a system to produce itself, perma-
nently and in interaction with its environment, and
thus to maintain its organization despite the changes.
First introduced to characterize living cells, it was
then extended to organisms and became equally im-
portant in cognitive science (Varela et al., 1992).

In vertebrates, the existence of central and pe-
ripheral nervous systems makes it possible to better
emphasize this distinction between the environment,
body and brain and to introduce two types of per-
ception, exteroception for sensations coming from the
environment (e.g., visual or auditory) and interocep-
tion for those coming from the body (including plea-
sure, pain and needs), as well as different types of
responses aimed at controlling these two classes of
signals (Craig, 2003).

The basal ganglia (BG) are brain structures that
play a central role in the selection of responses
adapted to internal and external states (Redgrave
et al., 1999). These structures are present in all ver-
tebrates and an homologous structure has even been

found in arthropods (Strausfeld and Hirth, 2013), with
similar neuronal activities and connectivity allowing
behavioral regulation. This structural consistency
across species makes them core structures within sur-
vival neural loops and we will therefore present these
structures in more detail in the next section.

Developing models of bio-inspired neuronal ar-
chitectures for survival functions is challenging at
multiple levels because the focus is usually set in neu-
ronal models on local perceptual analyses or cognitive
functions associated with direct performance mea-
sures. It is sometimes difﬁcult to distinguish the gen-
eral principles that aim at survival of autonomous sys-
tems. The same is true for the software and hardware
systems used to implement and evaluate these archi-
tectures. They are generally oriented towards solving
speciﬁc complex and sometimes abstract problems,
particularly in the context of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(Stoeter and Papanikolopoulos, 2005).

In the rest of this paper, we present a bio-inspired
neuronal model of loops involving the BG and its im-
plementation and experimentation using a software
platform dedicated to video games. The key point,
here, is to demonstrate to which extent this arrange-
ment is relevant to account for some fundamental
mechanisms of agent behavior related to survival and
to observe and manipulate them experimentally. The
joint use of these systems showcases several survival
scenarios and provides a road-map for future works.

2 A FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION

OF THE BASAL GANGLIA
LOOPS

The basal ganglia (BG) are a set of interconnected
sub-cortical nuclei, organized in loops with many
other brain structures (Parent and Hazrati, 1995), as
elaborated here. These loops are described as paral-
lel and segregated (Alexander et al., 1986) because
they correspond to distinct and related territories of
the structures involved, and because they are struc-
turally similar (in terms of involved neural popula-
tions and connectivity), suggesting that the same kind
of processing is applied generically to different infor-
mation.

The association of (interoceptive or exterocep-
tive) sensations with (internal or external) responses
is sometimes straightforward and a simple sensori-
motor structure is enough to trigger the response. But
the involvement of BG is essential when the selection
of the response (e.g., goal or action) is based on am-
bivalent or uncertain criteria (Floresco, 2015).

In the experiments reported in this paper, we con-
sider four loops as identiﬁed in primates in (Alexan-
der et al., 1986), involving different regions of the
Striatum, the largest nucleus of the BG. The ﬁrst two
loops are called limbic and are based on interocep-
tive information. They are organized around the se-
lection of the goal of the behavior, according to its
motivational value, in response to perceived needs or
according to its hedonic value. The other two are
called sensori-motor and they process exteroceptive
information. They are organized around the motor be-
havior allowing to reach the goal, according to its spa-
tial position (orientation) or according to the physical
characteristics involved (handling). We refer to these
four loops by the question each loop attempts to an-
swer, detailed as follows.
1. The Why loop selects the current motivation (sat-
isfying hunger or thirst in our task) from the in-
teroception of needs and possibly the costs of ac-
tions. The motivation is expressed in the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) and the loop also asso-
ciates the ventral striatum (the core of the nucleus
accumbens), lateral hypothalamus and insula for
interoception.

2. The What

loop selects the goal according to
the preferences (e.g., gustative preferences, quan-
tity), innate or acquired and represented in the
amygdala. Preferences are expressed in the or-
bitofrontal cortex (OFC) and the loop also com-
bines the ventral striatum (the shell of the nucleus
accumbens), amygdala and insula for gustative in-
teroception. The goal object can be consumed if it
is directly available, otherwise it will become the
goal for the spatial and temporal organization of
the behavior.

3. The Where loop considers the spatial location of
the goal and selects the orientation behavior rele-
vant to face it, which can concern eye movement
as well as body orientation, as also observed in
the superior colliculus. The orientation strategy
is expressed in the Frontal Eye Field (FEF) in the
frontal cortex and the loop also combines the dor-
solateral striatum, the parietal cortex and the su-
perior colliculus.

4. The How loop supports the latest postural adjust-
ments when the goal is attainable, by simply re-
ducing the distance or possibly manipulating the
object before consuming it. This concerns the mo-
tor areas, the parietal cortex and the dorsolateral
striatum.

This functional description highlights that
the
generic processing of response selection by the BG is
ascribed in a generic loop, also associating the frontal

cortex, sub-cortical and cortical sensory structures as
shown in ﬁgure 1.

We now describe the implementation of the loops
in a bio-inspired neuronal model and use them to em-
ulate a survival behavior in a simulation platform.
From a technical point of view, the description of the
tasks accomplished by each loop reveals certain char-
acteristics that are not conventionally considered in
neural models (e.g. notions of motivation or goal).
Furthermore, implementation in a video game simula-
tor requires dedicated speciﬁcations (e.g. bodily char-
acteristics, bodily needs and biological constraints).
We address these requirements in the design and im-
plementation of the system.

In addition, we have so far discussed each behav-
ioral loop individually, whereas describing the possi-
ble association and interactions of these loops is a ma-
jor topic in neuroscience (Haber et al., 2000). In the
case of survival tasks like the one we demonstrate, we
can particularly wonder how to model the functional
interaction between these loops and if different forms
of survival strategies (e. g. goal-driven or stimulus-
driven) can be performed on this basis. The latter
question forms one of the open problems in compu-
tational neuroscience (Daw et al., 2005), thus moti-
vating our digital experiments.

3 IMPLEMENTING A MODEL OF

BG LOOPS

As highlighted in the previous section, although each
loop addresses a different issue, the principle behind
the operations of these loops appears quite generic
in terms of their physical connectivity and computa-
tional dynamics. In this perspective, several generic
computational neuronal models of BG loops have
been proposed (Gurney et al., 2001; Guthrie et al.,
2013; Hazy et al., 2006). These neuronal models ex-
ploit several pathways observed between the nuclei
of the BG to implement the decisional process, with a
globally excitatory (direct) pathway for selecting the
best response and other inhibitory pathways (hyper-
direct or indirect) that will penalize inappropriate re-
sponses. The BG implementation in our model de-
scription is directly inspired from the ’Go-No Go’
process implemented in (Hazy et al., 2006) for the de-
cision process. Above mentioned models also agree
on the critical role of neuromodulators, in particu-
lar dopamine, in updating contextual associations ac-
cording to the prediction errors. We do not consider
this aspect in the current implementation and will ad-
dress it in further work.

Based on this computational formalism, we im-

plemented the four loops discussed in section above,
each in the form of a generic loop. A loop is formed
between 3 components (see Figure 1), with the in-
put information coming to the sensory module of the
loop (blue component). This sensory information will
elicit possible actions in the frontal module (green
component). These actions will compete until one
is selected and triggered. Basically, this selection is
made by BG (red component), also informed by the
sensory context. We will see below that the selec-
tion process might also involve the inﬂuence of other
loops. When an action is triggered, it remains active
with a sustained activity until some sensory informa-
tion is received, informing about the end of the action.
From a more practical point of view, in each loop,
the processing happens in the following stages, in a
given small time interval - information acquisition,
action evaluation and selection and sustained activa-
tion by feedback control. For each loop (i) acquire
sensory information through exteroception and inte-
roception, (ii) evaluate alternative responses, select
the most appropriate one and set the corresponding
goal, and ﬁnally (iii) sustain the activation of the re-
sponse by a constant feedback until the goal has been
achieved.

This generic mechanism of response maintenance
and goal monitoring is an important aspect of our
computational model, implemented in each loop. Se-
lecting a response to be executed means deﬁning a
sensory state that must be achieved (the goal). As
a consequence, the rule of response execution is im-
plemented as a sustained activation of the response
which terminates, thanks to a feedback mechanism,
when the goal is met. As it is elaborated in the sec-
tion Scenarios, the goal is not always reached sim-
ply by activating the response, but sometimes requires
other responses and secondary goals to be deﬁned,
still within the same generic mechanism. To imple-
ment this, we deﬁne a desired state of activation for
goals that asks for additional responses until it be-
comes actual.

To give a more concrete understanding of the in-
formation processed in each loop, we stick to the very
simple example that will be developed below, describ-
ing the connection of the model to an experimentation
platform and the unfolding of survival scenarios. In
this example, the agent is given two needs (represent-
ing thirst and hunger), each as a variable to maintain
between bounds to survive. It can also detect and pos-
sibly reach objects (representing food and drinks).

In that context, the two limbic loops can be de-
ﬁned as follows. The Why loop is responsible for
the selection of the need. It receives sensory infor-
mation about the levels of need through interoception

and about the kinds of objects perceived by extero-
ception. Responses it can trigger correspond to the
decision to go for food or drink, until the need is sat-
isﬁed (by consuming upon reaching). The What loop
is responsible for the selection of an object.
It re-
ceives sensory information about the levels of pref-
erence through interoception and about the identity of
the objects perceived by exteroception. Responses it
can trigger correspond to the decision to select one
object until the object is reached.

Similarly, the two sensori-motor loops can be de-
ﬁned, still using the same framework, as follows. The
Where loop is responsible for the orientation of the
agent in space. It receives the azimuth of each object
perceived by exteroception and when one is selected,
triggers a movement of orientation which stops when
the agent is facing the object. The How loop is re-
sponsible for the reaching of an object. It receives the
distance to each object it is facing by exteroception
and when one is selected, it moves forward until the
object is reached.

Before describing how these loops can be asso-
ciated in organized behavior, we present the Malmo
platform used for the experimentations and describe
the connection of the platform to the cerebral model
of loops.

(a) limbic

(b) sensori-motor

Figure 1: Implementation of two classes of generic loops
in the model. In both the classes, a blue component rep-
resents a region from Sensory Cortex, green represents a
region from Frontal cortex and the red BG represents the
corresponding sub-cortical BG nuclei involved in the loop.
A black component, Information (through Interoception or
Exteroception) feeds the blue component of the sensory cor-
tex which propagates it to both the Frontal Cortical regions
and the BG. (a) generic limbic loop - based on which the
What? and Why? loops are implemented.
(b) generic
sensori-motor loop - based on which, the Where? and How?
loops are implemented.

4 THE MALMO PLATFORM

Minecraft is a well-known video game, with a block
based 3D world, allowing virtual exploration, re-
source gathering, and including survival task scenar-
ios, this for a single or multiple players. It has been
adapted for a systemic neuroscience simulation plat-
form called ’Virtual Enaction’. Later, an experimen-
tation platform called Malmo was built on the top of
Minecraft (Johnson et al., 2016), and is dedicated to
support research in various AI related areas. Malmo
allows to incorporate various models of reinforce-
ment learning, planning and related problems into the
Minecraft game environment, ranging from a basic
Q-learning algorithms on a single agent to more col-
laborative and competitive strategies among multiple
agents.

The advancements in the research on intelligent
systems and their behavior requires to be able to test,
study and visualize the models in a more elaborative
setting, as opposed to the traditional symbolic rep-
resentations and numerical experimentations. Given
the complexity of the survival task that we target to
demonstrate, it is considerably difﬁcult to choose the
right kinds and number of attributes to be encoded in
the model. Malmo, exploiting the power of Minecraft
environment, precisely provides such great conve-
nience to study our model of generic loops. Here,
since our goal is to explain the dynamics of emer-
gence of the behavior using and organizing the loops
deﬁned in the model presented above, we use only
a speciﬁc set of Malmo features that are adapted ac-
cording to the task and the model. We have designed
on the top of Malmo a minimal software layer to ac-
commodate our adaptations concerning the interocep-
tive and exteroceptive attributes relevant to the sur-
vival task.

Particularly, Malmo provides a set of attributes
representing the vital characteristics of the agent. We
have built on them more precise variables relevant to
the task together with their functional dynamics, as a
part of the software layer. Similarly, the adaptations
related to the agent’s vision and the sensori-motor re-
sponses can be conveniently implemented using the
related features of Malmo. These attributes in con-
junction with our adaptations concisely explain the
generic dynamics in the loops as a result of which sev-
eral behaviors emerge. Furthermore, it is interesting
to observe that Malmo invariantly supports demon-
strating these different behaviors with no or minimal
changes to itself but only from the changes in the state
of the agent or that of the environment.

In the rest of this section, we explain the attributes
of Malmo that we have used in the context of the

BG(VentralStriatum)Temporal/InsularCortexWhat?Why?PrefrontalCortexActionInteroceptionBG(DorsolateralStriatum)ParietalCortexWhere?How?MotorCortexActionExteroceptionsurvival task. In the subsequent section, we describe
the additional software layer with the adaptations that
also demonstrates the embodiment of the agent.

World. This is the environment in which an agent
is free to move around and explore, besides other
objects (items) present in it. It is a simpliﬁed envi-
ronment of the Minecraft world, designed to have a
complete control on the external objects, and simple
enough to understand the causal relationships with re-
spect to the simulated agent behavior. It is 3 dimen-
sional, allowing the items to be at a height above the
ground and allowing the agent(s) to jump if neces-
sary. The ground (ﬂoor) is deﬁned in terms of blocks
which have properties like texture, type and color.
Such block properties like the color play the role of
the environment context. In behavioral scenarios like
fear learning or fear extinction, the context is a useful
attribute because it adds an extra dimension to pro-
cessing the stimulus information and attributes a pref-
erential relevance to it (either from previous learning
or from memory).

Agent. Malmo allows multiple agents to interact
simultaneously in a given environment. An agent, at
any given point of time, has access to its vital vari-
ables like life, its current position and its current ori-
entation with respect to the World. Like in the case
of an animal, the variables are affected by the exter-
nal world - for e.g, components like ﬁre or an attack
could reduce life. In the context of our task, we con-
sider only a single agent.

Items Malmo provides a list of items that can be
procedurally placed in the environment. When the
items are in the conﬁgured vicinity of the agent, the
positions and the orientations of the items are avail-
able for the agent. Each item can be conﬁgured with
a certain reward value at the beginning of the task.
As a part of a task, the reward can be awarded to the
agent, either for collecting the item or discarding it.
There are several such items, from which we use ap-
ple, cake, water bucket and stew. The distance within
which the agent can collect the item can also be con-
ﬁgured.

Actions. Suitable to the 3D world, the agent is ca-
pable of doing actions like moving, turning and jump-
ing. In order for the agent to reach an object or a posi-
tion, it uses, from the in-built set of actions, predom-
inantly the turn action (to orient towards a stimulus)
and move (to approach a stimulus or keep exploring).
Any of the actions can be stopped when required.

State. The state of the world, at any given instant,
is constituted by the attributes of both the agent and
the objects present in the vicinity of the agent. At
any instant, the agent has information about its cur-
rent levels of vital variables and how far they are from

critical or fatal limits. It also has information about its
own position and orientation with respect to the envi-
ronment.
Information about the item like its name,
position and the reward it carries is also accessible
the agent. As explained earlier, context also is a part
of the state, describing the type of the ﬂoor for a re-
quested subset of blocks.

5 EMBODIMENT OF THE AGENT

We describe here, the adaptations that we made to
Malmo, in order to connect our model of cerebral
loops to the world simulated in Malmo, including the
characteristics of the environment and the agent. In
addition to the technical considerations, these adap-
tations allow us to distinguish several actors in our
tasks, namely the brain, the body and the environ-
ment, which have been often reported to constitute
embodied cognition (Varela et al., 1992). Hence, at-
tributing bodily features to the agent and associating
them to its motivational and emotional characteris-
tics form a key aspect of our model. These charac-
teristics have been respectively implemented in terms
of needs and preferences. Also, from a functional
point of view, we adapted few aspects like visibility of
the agent and the information about the positions (of
items as well as the agent itself). These adaptations
were important to add certain biologically plausible
restrictions to the task.

Needs and Preferences. The agent has two vi-
tal variables - hunger and thirst - which increase with
time as well as with its efforts (meaning a move or
turn action).
Instead of a one dimensional reward,
each item carries a value that is relevant to the hunger
or the thirst level it would satisfy, and a value indicat-
ing the level of preference of the agent for this item.
Visibility. Malmo provides information about the
items all around the agent’s vicinity of chosen range.
However, we restrict its ‘Field Of Vision‘ to a bio-
logically plausible value (in this case, 120◦), which
is further divided into 3 different zones viz., Appear,
See and Reach, depending on the distance from the
agent. When the agent is moving and some items are
present in the Appear zone, the agent has no precise
information about the stimuli (the items that are per-
ceived by the agent) such as the precise location of
each, or their preference appetitive values. Rather, the
agent has minimal information about the presence or
absence of some items in some direction. When the
stimuli are within the See zone, all the information
about the stimuli is provided as inputs to the model.
In the Reach zone, an additional information is pro-
vided, that the stimuli are accessible for the agent to

random direction, moves by a random distance and
rotates again. When some stimuli are perceived, if
they are in the Appear zone, the agent moves in that
direction until they are in the See zone and can be dis-
criminated. Then depending on the current behavior,
several actions can be triggered as described below.

This basic behavior also forms an interesting basis
to learn or update the contingencies in the environ-
ment or between characteristics of the environment
and those of the agent. Particularly, in the limbic
loops, this can contribute to set the values of the pref-
erences and help connect some items to the needs they
can satisfy. In the sensori-motor loops, this can help
calibrate the movements of the agent and learn the
consequences (in terms of modiﬁcation in the percep-
tion) of their activation. However, since the work we
report here concerns the dynamics of the loops, we
provide the agent with this initial learning of funda-
mental contingencies as a pre-existing set of values,
thereby enabling the agent to exploit them in its be-
havior.

6.2 Goal Directed Behavior (GD)

The system has been initially designed for a simple
survival task, corresponding to activate the loops in
a hierarchical way. First the Why limbic loop mon-
itors the levels of the needs and when one of them
passes above a critical threshold, satisfying this need
becomes the primary goal of the agent. In the What
limbic loop, the objects associated to the satisfaction
of this need, are set as potential secondary goals and
are activated as desired. If none of them is presently
perceived, an exploration behavior is triggered in the
Where sensori-motor loop, making the agent rotate
until it perceives some stimuli. If they are too far (in
the Appear zone), the agent approaches for them to
be in the See zone and gathers their characteristics
including the preferences. If several stimuli are per-
ceived, the one with the highest preference is selected
as the secondary goal of the behavior. The agent ap-
proaches the stimulus until it reaches and consumes
it, thus satisfying the goals of the behavior. An imple-
mentation of this behavior is described in the section
Illustrations.

6.3 Stimulus Driven Behavior (SD)

Without a speciﬁc goal or motivation, the agent can
wander in the environment and discover by chance
In this case, the What limbic
one or several items.
loop (estimating agent’s preference from external in-
formation) is triggered and can select the most pre-
ferred item. Although the Why limbic loop (deﬁn-

Figure 2: Zones of visibility in the ﬁeld of agent’s vision.
Zone marked ’R’ is Reach, ’S’ is See and ’A’ is Appear.

consume.

Positions In regard to the positions of the agent
and the items in the environment, Malmo provides
their exact coordinates, the absolute yaw details with
respect to the environment. But to demonstrate a very
important feature within each loop of the model, we
avoid using these exact position details. Instead, we
take the agent as the origin, convert the relative dis-
tance and orientations of the items into signals that
regulate the activity within the loops of the model. It
is usually these feedback signals relative to the de-
sired state and the current state of the agent that sus-
tain the execution of a selected goal.

6 SCENARIOS

We intentionally deﬁne a world with simple and few
characteristics, in order to study precisely, not only
the functioning of each loop, but also the way they
interact with one another to emulate speciﬁc kinds of
behavior. We present here for illustration, some be-
haviors that could be demonstrated with the model to
emulate and others that are part of our ongoing work.

6.1 Exploration Behavior

Actions for spatial exploration can be triggered for
several reasons. They can be triggered if, as in goal-
directed behaviors described below, the agent must
explore the environment to ﬁnd desired stimuli. They
can be also triggered, as in the stimulus-driven be-
havior described below, if the agent has no current
need, to give it the opportunity to discover new op-
tions. For any kind of behavior, the agent can also ap-
ply an exploration/exploitation strategy (Humphries
et al., 2012) and at any moment interrupt the current
behavior to explore. The exploration behavior is also
particularly important at the beginning of the task,
when the agent rotates until it can perceives some
If nothing is perceived, the agent selects a
stimuli.

ing the levels of need) has not triggered the decision
making process beforehand, it can be activated by this
preference and, depending on the corresponding level
of need, it can decide to activate the sensori-motor
loops to execute an action in order to reach and con-
sume the selected item.

6.4 Opportunistic Behavior

As a part of our ongoing work, we would like to be
able to interrupt a behavior in an opportunistic way.
This is speciﬁcally the case when the agent is engaged
in a goal-driven behavior and suddenly perceives a
stimulus corresponding to the non-selected need but
with a strong preference. In this case, it is conceiv-
able to reason that, in some condition, it is preferable
to choose a stimulus with a strong impact on a minor
need as compared to another stimulus with a minor
impact on the current need. This could be particularly
the case if the stimulus with the strong preference is
rare or if stimuli detected to satisfy the major need
have very low levels of preference (or both). Bet-
ter understanding the mutual inﬂuences between the
limbic loops (Haber et al., 2000) is one of the major
challenges in our ongoing work.

7 ILLUSTRATIONS

Figure 3 shows a sequence of snapshots from a goal-
directed behavior, as implemented in Malmo. In this
basic scenario, the agent has already selected its most
urgent need, (hunger in ﬁgure 3(b) inset). The satis-
faction of this need now becomes a desired state as a
primary goal, which remains active in the Why loop
until the need is satisﬁed. From previous experience
to address the current need, the Why loop triggers the
desired state of the stimuli known to satisfy the need,
in the What loop. Figure 3(a) illustrates this explo-
ration behavior, where the agent starts to move with a
desired activation for some items (apple and cake in
this case). If, as it is the case here, perceived stimuli
are too far (in the Appear zone), the agent will have
to move until they are in the See zone and can be dis-
criminated.. When the detected stimuli are in the See
zone, the simplest of the cases is when only one of the
items is desired and can be directly selected. How-
ever, when encountered with multiple desired items,
the agent has to decide the suitable choice among the
items, suitable meaning the one with the highest pref-
erence (as illustrated in ﬁgure 3(b)).

Once the decision has been made, as a secondary
goal, the selected stimulus becomes desired in the
What loop and remains active until it is reached. The

execution of the behavior involves two steps. (i) To
evoke the necessary sequence of actions to reach the
goal and (ii) to sustain the selected goal until the agent
In the case
actually reaches the selected stimulus.
considered here, once an item is chosen, the other sec-
ondary goals are to orient towards the selected item
and the reach it. The agent starts turning towards the
chosen item. Here turning doesn’t stop by using the
target yaw provided by Malmo. Instead, we derive a
feedback signal to the Where loop to sustain the act of
turning until the agent is oriented towards the item, as
illustrated in ﬁgure 3(c)&(d).

Then, the agent can move towards the target to
reach it. With exactly the same mechanisms as de-
scribed above, but here applied in the How loop,
the goal of reaching is maintained until the item is
reached. And once reached, this goal is considered
achieved.
In our current implementation, the inter-
nal action of consumption is automatically triggered
when an item is reached. In this case, the goal in the
What loop (sustained from the initial selection of the
goal) is considered achieved. This consumption will
also modify the level of need and similarly, the goal
in the Why loop is also considered satisﬁed. This ter-
minates the behavior as this was the primary goal of
the scenario illustrated.

Figure 3: Snapshots at different stages in the task. The ﬁg-
ure shows several steps involved in a goal-directed behavior
of the agent. (a) exploration until the agent ﬁnds some stim-
uli in the Appear zone. (b) decision among the stimuli in the
See zone, corresponding to the current need (inset:hunger).
(c) orienting towards the selected stimulus until it is in the
(d) ready to approach towards the oriented
line of sight.
stimulus.

8 DISCUSSION

REFERENCES

The work that we have presented here can be consid-
ered under three points of view.

Firstly, this work is original by its deep anchor-
ing in biological inspiration. The behavior of our au-
tonomous agent is elaborated thanks to a model built
on four loops described as playing an important role
in the brain of most animals (Alexander et al., 1986).
This inspiration is anatomical, considering the nature
of information ﬂows brought by several sensory and
motor regions. This inspiration is also functional,
particularly considering mechanisms to select actions
and to sustain goals until they are achieved. A ma-
jor characteristic of this work is to consider similar
architectural and functional properties to build four
loops and to build all the considered behaviors only
by emergence, on the basis of the loops and their in-
teractions. This biological inspiration is also very pre-
cious because most of the questions and orientations
for future works we have evoked in the paper will be
addressed by going deeper into biological details.

Secondly, we have argued that, even if these loops
are mostly studied for the understanding of higher
cognitive functions like reward-based decision mak-
ing, considering them to implement survival scenar-
ios is very important to design autonomous systems.
Particularly, considering such basic scenarios is very
convenient to study all the loops together, which is
It is
hardly addressed in the modeling literature.
also interesting to understand how the two basic pro-
cesses of signaling and regulation have evolved to al-
low for more abstract behaviors, which can still be
described as interactions between limbic and sensori-
motor loops, originally built for survival.

Thirdly, another major innovation of this paper is
to propose that Malmo, a platform originally designed
for experimentation in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, is a very
powerful tool to build basic autonomous systems per-
forming survival tasks. Not only it offers many inter-
esting characteristics for the simulation and the visu-
alization of a survival task, but it also eases the design
of the most critical part, corresponding to the interface
between the computational parts of the model and the
internal and bodily aspects of the agent. In addition,
this platform has another usefulness. To address the
critical questions we have evoked in this work, we are
currently seeking insights from biology, to improve
and augment our model. Some of these questions are
clearly unanswered by the current state of the art and
must be investigated jointly with neuroscientists. In
this perspective, Malmo offers a striking advantage to
describe our model and its behavior to them, who are
more accustomed to biological observations than al-
gorithms and equations.

Alexander, G., DeLong, M., and Strick, P. (1986). Par-
allel organization of functionally segregated circuits
linking basal ganglia and cortex. Ann. Rev. Neurosci.,
9:357–381.

Craig, A. D. (2003). Interoception: the sense of the phys-
iological condition of the body. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 13(4):500–505.

Daw, N. D., Niv, Y., and Dayan, P. (2005). Uncertainty-
based competition between prefrontal and dorsolateral
striatal systems for behavioral control. Nature neuro-
science, 8(12):1704.

Floresco, S. B. (2015). The nucleus accumbens: an inter-
face between cognition, emotion, and action. Annual
review of psychology, 66:25–52.

Gurney, K., Prescott, T. J., and Redgrave, P. (2001). A com-
putational model of action selection in the basal gan-
glia. i. a new functional anatomy. Biological Cyber-
netics, 84(6):401–410.

Guthrie, M., Leblois, A., Garenne, A., and Boraud, T.
(2013).
Interaction between cognitive and motor
cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision making:
A computational study. Journal of Neurophysiology.
Haber, S., Fudge, J., and McFarland, N. (2000). Striaton-
igrostriatal pathways in primates form an ascending
spiral from the shell to the dorsolateral striatum. J
Neurosci, 20(6):2369–2382.

Hazy, T. E., Frank, M. J., and O’Reilly, R. C. (2006).
Banishing the homunculus: making working memory
work. Neuroscience, 139(1):105–118.

Humphries, M., Khamassi, M., and Gurney, K. (2012).
Dopaminergic control of the exploration-exploitation
trade-off via the basal ganglia. Frontiers in Neuro-
science, 6:9.

Johnson, M., Hofmann, K., Hutton, T., and Bignell, D.
(2016). The malmo platform for artiﬁcial intelligence
experimentation. In IJCAI, pages 4246–4247.
Maturana, H. R. and Varela, F. J. (1991). Autopoiesis
and Cognition: The Realization of the Living (Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 42). D. Rei-
del Publishing Company, 1st edition.

Parent, A. and Hazrati, L. N. (1995). Functional anatomy
of the basal ganglia. I. The cortico-basal ganglia-
thalamo-cortical loop. Brain Res Brain Res Rev,
20(1):91–127.

Redgrave, P., Prescott, T. J., and Gurney, K. (1999). The
basal ganglia: A vertebrate solution to the selection
problem? Neuroscience, 89(4):1009–1023.

Stoeter, S. A. and Papanikolopoulos, N. (2005). Au-
tonomous stair-climbing with miniature jumping
robots. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cy-
bernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), 35(2):313–325.
Strausfeld, N. J. and Hirth, F. (2013). Deep Homology
of Arthropod Central Complex and Vertebrate Basal
Ganglia. Science, 340(6129):157–161.

Varela, F. J., Thompson, E. T., and Rosch, E. (1992). The
Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Ex-
perience. The MIT Press.

