The formation of habits: The implicit supervision of the
basal ganglia
Meropi Topalidou, Camille Piron, Daisuke Kaise, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P.

Rougier

To cite this version:

Meropi Topalidou, Camille Piron, Daisuke Kaise, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier. The formation
of habits: The implicit supervision of the basal ganglia. Fifth International Symposium on Biology of
Decision Making (SBDM 2015), May 2015, Paris, France. ￿hal-01156477￿

HAL Id: hal-01156477

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01156477

Submitted on 28 May 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

If basal ganglia are widely accepted to participate in the 
high-level cognitive function of decision-making, their role is 
less clear regarding the formation of habits. One of the 
biggest problem is to understand how goal-directed actions 
are transformed into habitual responses, or, said differently, 
how an animal can shift from an action-outcome (A-O) 
system to a stimulus-response (S-R) one while keeping a 
consistent behaviour? 

l

e
v
o
N

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
C

Trial start

Cue presentation

Go signal

Decision

Reward

Trial stop

l
a
u
t
i
b
a
H

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
C

Pre-learned cues

P = 0.75

P = 0.25

Novel cues (every day)

P = 0.75

We introduce a computational model that can solve a simple 
two armed bandit task using reinforcement learning and 
explicit valuation of the outcome. Hebbian learning has been 
added at the cortical level such that the model learns each 
time a move is issued, rewarded or not. Then, by inhibiting 
the output nuclei of the model (GPi), we show how learning has been transferred from the basal ganglia to the cortex, simply as a consequence of the 
statistics of the choice. Because best (in the sense of most rewarded) actions are chosen more often, this directly impacts the amount of Hebbian learning 
and lead to the formation of habits within the cortex. These results have been conﬁrmed in monkeys doing the same tasks where the BG has been inactivated 
using muscimol. This tends to show that the basal ganglia implicitely teach the cortex in order for it to learn the values of new options.

1.0s - 1.5s

1.0s - 1.5s

1.0s - 1.5s

Time

P = 0.25

THE FORMATION OF HABITS 
 The implicit supervision of the basal ganglia 

 MEROPI TOPALIDOU - CAMILLE PIRON - DAISUKE KASE - THOMAS BORAUD - NICOLAS ROUGIER

External current

External current

External current

After the initial training phase, we tested the model using four diﬀerent paradigms that 
corresponds to the experiments:


-
+

-+

Cortex
motor

1

2

1

+

Cortex
associative

Cortex
cognitive

Y
A
W
H
T
A
P
T
C
E
R
D
R
E
P
Y
H

I

GPe
motor

Y
A
W
H
T
A
P
T
C
E
R
D
N

I

I

STN
motor

3

Striatum
motor

Striatum
associative

Striatum
cognitive

Y
A
W
H
T
A
P
T
C
E
R
D

I

-

-

-

-

GPi
motor

-

GPi
cognitive

-

GPe
cognitive

STN
cognitive

-

-

-

Thalamus
motor

Thalamus
cognitive

The model is based on the model presented in [1] which itself derives from the competition 
principles introduced in [2]. This former model introduces an action selection mechanism that is 
based upon the competition between a positive feedback through the direct pathway and a 
negative feedback through the hyperdirect pathway. The model has been further extended in [2] and 
exploits the parallel organization of circuits between the basal ganglia and the cortex [3] using 
segregated loops: one for making the selection between the two presented cue shapes, and the 
other for making the selection between the two possible movement directions. However, to solve 
the task described previously, it is necessary for the model to ﬁrst choose the cue shape and then 
(and only then) to select the right movement direction which depends upon the chosen cue. The 
model has been further reﬁned in this study such as to have a competition mechanisms within each 
cortical group. Using short range excitation and long range inhibitions, this competition ensures that 
a unique cognitive and motor decision eventually emerges, even if these decisions might be 
unrelated at this stage. Learning occurs between the cognitive cortex and the cognitive striatum 
using a simple reinforcement learning where the value of the diﬀerent cues are updated after each 
decision (see [2] for details). We added Hebbian learning (LTP) at the cortical level between the 
cognitive/motor cortical groups and the associative cortical group. This learning is enforced once 
per trial, at the time a move is made and independently of the actual reward. The model has been 
trained on cues 1 and 2 (cognitive cortex) that are presented simulatenously at random positions in 
the motor cortex. Cue 1 is associated with a reward probability of 75% while cue 2 is associated 
with a reward probability of 25%. The model is trained until it achieves a performance of 0.95, 
meaning it chooses cue 1 most of the time. This takes between 10 and 20 trials depending on the 
initial conditions (noise) and whether ﬁrst cues are rewarded or not. In the meantime, this training 
impacts signiﬁcantly Hebbian learning at the cortical level because cue 1 is chosen most of the time 
and consequently, the associative link relative to cue 1 is reinforced compared to associative link 
relative to cue 2 (while cues 3 and 4 are never reinforced since they are never presented).


[1] M. Guthrie, A. Leblois, A. Garenne, and T. Boraud. Interaction between cognitive and motor cortico-basal 
ganglia loops during decision making: a computational study. Journal of Neurophysiology, 109:3025–3040, 2013.

[2] Leblois A, Boraud T, Meissner W, Bergmann H, Hansel D. Competition betweenfeedback loops underlies 
normal and pathological dynamics in the basal ganglia. J Neurosci 26: 3567–3583, 2006.

[3] Alexander G, Crutcher M, De Long M. Basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuits: parallel substrates for motor, 
oculomotor, “prefrontal” and “limbic” functions. Prog Brain Res 85: 119–146, 1991.

• HC/GPi (saline): Habitual Condition using cues 1 & 2 with intact GPi

• NC/GPi (saline): Novel Condition using cues 3 & 4 with intact GPi

• HC/NoGPi (muscimol): Habitual Condition using cues 1 & 2 with lesioned GPi

• NC/NoGPi (muscimol): Novel Condition using cues 3 & 4 with lesioned GPi


An experiment is made of 120 consecutive trials. Each trial starts with a settling period that 
last for 500ms until two cues are presented to the model at random position. Once a 
motor decision is made, the reward is computed according to the chosen cue, that is, the 
one that corresponds to the actual motor choice and not the cognitive one. Response time 
has been recorded as the time of the motor decision, that is, when the diﬀerence between 
two greatest motor activation is greater than the decision threshold (40Hz). This time is 
relative to the stimulus onset. Each of the four conditions has been averaged over 250 
experiments


Model results are in accordance with the experiments in 
monkeys. In the habitual condition (HC), performances are 
optimal with or without lesion, indicating the cortex is able to 
make the optimal decision without the help of the basal 
ganglia if it has been learned previously. In novel condition, 
performances of the intact model (NC/Gpi) are initially at 
chance level but after a few trials (around 15), it reaches a 
near-optimal performance, indicating the model has learned 
the respective reward probability associated with each novel 
cues. However, for the lesioned model (NC/NoGPi), performances stay at chance level, 
indicating the cortex is unable to learn the new task without the help of the basal ganglia.

Model performances in the four conditions. 
Each trial has been averaged over 250 
experiments. In habitual conditions, 
performances are optimal with (GPi) or 
without GPi (NoGPi). In novel conditions, only 
the intact model (GPi) is able to learn the new 
c u e s w h i l e l e s i o n e d m o d e l ( N o G P i ) 
performances stay at chance level.

Monkeys were tested using 20 sessions in 
control conditions and 20 in muscimol 
conditions (10 for each monkey in each 
condition). We deﬁned as success rate, the 
number of trials in which the animals chose the 
optimal target (i.e. HC1 or NC1 in Habitual or 
Novelty conditions respectively), normalized by 
the number of trials in which a choice has 
been achieved. When a trial is interrupted 
before a choice has been achieved and 
validated, it is considered as an error trial. 


A
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

e
t
a
r

s
s
e
c
c
u
s
n
a
e
M

C
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

e
t
a
r

s
s
e
c
c
u
s
n
a
e
M

HC 

NC

saline
muscimol

0

20 

40

60 

80

100

120

Number of trials

0

20 

40

60 

80

100

120

Number of trials

B

e
t
a
r

s
s
e
c
c
u
s
n
a
e
M

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

D

e
t
a
r

s
s
e
c
c
u
s
n
a
e
M

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

\*

\*

\*

\*

\*

\*

HC NC

HC NC

HC NC

HC

NC

Saline

Muscimol

Saline

Muscimol

Mean of first 25 trials

Mean of last 25 trials

\*

\*

\*

\*

HC NC

HC NC

HC NC

HC

NC

Saline

Muscimol

Saline

Muscimol

Mean of first 25 trials

Mean of last 25 trials

\*

\*

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

F

e
t
a
r

e
t
a
r

E
1.0

s
s
e
c
c
u
s
n
a
e
M

In control conditions, the animals maximize 
their choice in the Habitual Condition. The 
mean success rate is 99.4±3.3% (Figure A), 
respectively 98.8 ± 0.6% for Monkey F (Figure 
C) and 100.0 ± 0.0% for monkey Z (Figure E), 
P>0.05 between the two animal (unpaired t-
test). In the Novelty Condition, they learn progressively the diﬀerence between the two 
cues (Figure A,C & E). They choose randomly at the beginning of training to ﬁnally display a 
preference for NC1, the target associated to the best utility (mean 53.8±4.4% to 
93.0±2.5%, Figure B). The two monkeys displayed the same behavior (48.8±4.1% to 
91.2±4.7% for Monkey F and 58.8±7.8% to 94.8 ± 2.0% for monkey Z, P>0.05 between 
the two animal and P<0.01 between the start and the end of sessions, Figure D &F). 

Number of trials

s
s
e
c
c
u
s
n
a
e
M

Mean of first 25 trials

Mean of last 25 trials

HC NC

HC NC

HC NC

Muscimol

Muscimol

Saline

Saline

100

120

NC

HC

20 

60 

0.8

0.0

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.2

\*

\*

\*

80

40

0

--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
