Silicon soul: The vain dream of electronic immortality
Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier. Silicon soul: The vain dream of electronic immortality. The Conversation France,
2016. ￿hal-01251718￿

HAL Id: hal-01251718

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01251718

Submitted on 6 Jan 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NoDerivatives 4.0 International License

Silicon soul: The vain dream of electronic immortality

Our bodies set some requirements for what it would mean to upload our brains. Nicolas Rougier, Author

provided

In just over 30 years, humans will be able to upload their entire minds to computers

and become digitally immortal. – Ray Kurzweil, Global Futures 2045 International

Congress (2013)

Without even considering the ethical, philosophical, social or legal scope of such a

statement, it’s important to consider if it actually makes any sense. To try to give an

educated guess, we have to move away from computer science and look at what
biology and neuroscience can teach us.

The sensible world

In his book Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World Together Again, Andy Clark

explains that:

The biological mind is, first and foremost, an organ for controlling the biological

body. Minds make motions, and they must make them fast – before the predator

catches you, or before your prey gets away from you. Minds are not disembodied

logical reasoning devices.

To better understand this assertion, it’s essential to know that our bodies are literally

covered with sensors – chemical, mechanical, visual, thermal, proprioceptive

(perception of the body), noniceptive (perception of pain). All of them inform the brain

about the outside world (exteroception) and the inner world (interoception), allowing it

to regulate the body. The majority of our brain is actually dedicated to the processing

of sensory information, and the largest part of that is devoted to visual information,

occupying the entire occipital lobe and large parts of the temporal and parietal lobes.

We are mostly visual beings who, incidentally, think.

If someone wants to “upload his entire mind to a computer,” the problem of sensors

must be solved. A quick and dirty solution could be to not worry about them and just

pretend that all sensory neurons would remain silent forever. However, 50 years ago,

Donald O. Hebb conducted a series of experiments to study the effects of sensory

deprivation. He generously paid students to recline 24/7, taking care to deprive them of

most of their senses using glasses, helmets, gloves and so on. The majority of the

students abandoned the experiment after two or three days because they were no

longer able to develop coherent thoughts and began to suffer from auditory and visual

hallucinations. The experiences evoked considerable interest from the CIA (which

financed the original study) and they later “improved” the process up to the point

where it was transformed into an instrument of psychological torture.

The body electric

Consequently, if we want to “upload our brain” without going insane, it’s imperative for
the uploaded brain to be connected to an artificial body that can perceive the outside

world and act on it. But what kind of artificial body do we have today? Robotic bodies

where retinas are replaced by cameras and muscles by motors? To some extent, yes,

but this solution would be only a pale replica, far from the complexity and intelligence

of the human body, as nicely explained by Rolf Pfeiffer and Josh Bongard’s book How

the Body Shapes the Way We Think.

During childhood, a brain learns through experience to control its body and to leverage
its specifics. For example, consider the fingertips, which are sufficiently soft and

sensitive that we can easily grasp small objects. There’s no need for the brain to send

a precise command – the intelligence is in the body itself. Imagine trying to do the

same thing with thimbles over each finger, and you will understand how your body

automatically solves a number of problems all by itself.

Diagram of the retina, in its sensory complexity. Cajal, CC BY-SA

What about the artificial eyes we’d need? Even though high-resolution cameras now

exist, the eyes we’re born with each have approximately five million cones and 100

millions rods, plus the various “preprocessing” stages, from the horizontal, bipolar,

amacrine and ganglion cells. We are indeed very far from being able to reproduce a full

artificial retina, even though some amazing research in Paris has succeeded in helping

the vision-impaired see again.

As a first step, we could therefore use those simplified robotic bodies with their

reduced sensory and motor skills. Would it affect our minds? Yes. Our cognition

depends on the interactions we have with the world, and this interaction is conveyed

by both our perceptions and our actions. If you change them, you also change the

sensory experience of the world as well as its underlying logic. Cognition is embodied.

We further explore this question in the second part of this article.

This article was originally published in French

