Computational benefits of structural plasticity,
illustrated in songbirds
Remya Sankar, Nicolas P. Rougier, Arthur Leblois

To cite this version:

Remya Sankar, Nicolas P. Rougier, Arthur Leblois. Computational benefits of structural plastic-
ity, illustrated in songbirds. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, In press, 132, pp.1183-1196.
￿10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.10.033￿. ￿hal-03416314￿

HAL Id: hal-03416314

https://hal.science/hal-03416314

Submitted on 5 Nov 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Computational benefits of structural plasticity,
illustrated in songbirds

Remya Sankar1,2,3,† and Nicolas P.Rougier1,2,3,4,† and Arthur Leblois2,3,†
1Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France;
2Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives, Universit´e de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France;
3Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives, CNRS, UMR 5293;
4LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux, INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, Talence, France;
†These authors have contributed equally to this work.
∗Corresponding author: Arthur.Leblois@u-bordeaux.fr

Abstract

The plasticity of nervous systems allows animals to quickly adapt to a changing envi-
ronment.
In particular, the structural plasticity of brain networks is often critical to the
development of the central nervous system and the acquisition of complex behaviors. As an
example, structural plasticity is central to the development of song-related brain circuits and
may be critical for song acquisition in juvenile songbirds. Here, we review current evidences
for structural plasticity and their significance from a computational point of view. We start
by reviewing evidence for structural plasticity across species and categorizing them along
the spatial axes as well as the along the time course during development. We introduce the
vocal learning circuitry in zebra finches, as a useful example of structural plasticity, and
use this specific case to explore the possible contributions of structural plasticity to com-
putational models. Finally, we discuss current modelling studies incorporating structural
plasticity and unexplored questions which are raised by such models.

1

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

3

4
4
5
6

7
7
9
13
15

16

20

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Structural plasticity
.

Spatial scale .

2.1
.
2.2 Time course across development .
2.3

.
.
Interaction between structural and functional plasticity .

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

3 From structure to neural activity to song

3.1 General behavior and brain anatomy in birds
.
3.2 Avian vocal learning .
.
3.3
.
3.4

.
.
Structural plasticity in songbirds .
.
Functional impact of structural plasticity .

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

4 From biology to machine learning

5 Conclusion

2

1 Introduction

Plasticity is defined as the capacity of the neural activity generated by an experience to modify neu-
ral circuit function and thereby modify subsequent thoughts, feelings, and behavior according to [1].
This definition of plasticity encompasses a broad range of phenomena that have been observed to
induce an alteration of the function or the structure of a neural component. For instance, plastic-
ity can be induced by an external stimuli, an internal state, a lesion, etc. Such alterations of neural
components occur across a large range of spatial scales and take place through different mecha-
nisms: i) intrinsic plasticity relates to the continual alteration of a neuron’s inherent biophysical
characteristics by neuronal activity [2] ii) synaptic plasticity relates to the activity-dependent
modification of the strength or efficacy of synaptic transmission at preexisting synapses [1] iii)
representational plasticity relates to the re-organisation of distributed responses as a result of
persistent external changes [3]. On the temporal scale, short-term plasticity occurs on the sub-
second to minutes time scale in response to an external event such as, for example, an external
stimulation and may be transient. Long-term plasticity occurs on the hours, days or years time
scale and encompasses long-lasting changes such as the modification of behavior, the formation
of new memory, development of new connections across regions, etc.

Across these different spatial and temporal scales, plasticity operates via different means and
there are two main forms in which plasticity manifests itself: functional and structural. Func-
tional plasticity involves changes in synaptic strengths without any change in the anatomical con-
nectivity between neurons [4]. This can be realized through the insertion or the removal of synap-
tic receptors, change in the presynaptic release of transmitters or change in the thickness of
the synapse and has been studied in a large number of works [5, 1]. Structural plasticity refers
to changes in the physical anatomical connections (excluding the simple insertion/removal of
synaptic receptors). There are numerous evidences of structural plasticity: from the excessive ax-
onal branching during ontogeny with ensuing pruning to the rapid increase in synaptic density
during infancy with subsequent slower synapse elimination to adult neurogenesis in the mam-
malian hippocampus [6, 7, 8, 9, 4]. Major structural reorganisation of the primary somatosensory
cortex has also been observed following amputation or sensory deprivation [3] in primates while
the trimming of whiskers in juvenile rats have been shown to induce a realignment of the den-
drites of stellate neurons in the barrel cortex [10]. Such evidences suggests that a change in
neural activity may induce structural plasticity. The mechanisms underlying plasticity and its
relationship with behaviour, learning and memory have been studied for several decades [11, 12,
13] with a major focus on functional plasticity more than structural plasticity [14, 15, 16]. For
example, long term potentiation, long term depression and spike time dependent plasticity have
been intensively explored experimentally and widely incorporated in a number of computational
works [17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. However, with the advent of new experimental techniques, such as
diffusion tensor imaging, the number of studies in structural plasticity has increased [22] and
several of these studies from the last decade have clearly demonstrated the importance of struc-
tural rearrangements [23]. It has been widely discussed that structural plasticity confers several
advantages, such as improving energy efficiency of network formation, increasing information
capacity, amongst others (discussed further in section 4) [24, 25, 26]. Moreover, it holds the ca-
pacity to improve learning in a circuit, while conserving resources [27]. This leads us to explore
the role played by such structural plasticity in learning and development. While there are sev-
eral instances across species, from ontogeny to seasonal plasticity (discussed in section 2 and 3),
where the role played by such plasticity can be deduced based on the hypotheses prevalent in
literature, benefits specific to a particular circuit and function may emerge in certain ecological
contexts. Using this particular case of sensorimotor learning in the vocal learning circuitry of
birds, where the function fulfilled by structural plasticity is not immediately evident, we inves-

3

tigate if structural plasticity can additionally contribute directly to circuit function.

In this article, we propose to review current evidences for structural plasticity and their signifi-
cance from a computational point of view. More precisely, we aim at investigating if, and how,
structural plasticity is critical for vocal learning in juvenile songbirds. To do so, we start by re-
viewing evidences for structural plasticity across species and categorizing them along the spatial
axis as well as along the time course of development. We, then, proceed to draw a parallel with
songbirds, showcasing similar phenomenon observed therein. We introduce the vocal learning
circuitry in songbirds, as an important example of structural plasticity, and use this specific case
to explore the possible contributions of structural plasticity to computational models. Finally,
we discuss properties that can be exploited computationally, and unexplored questions which
are raised by such models.

2 Structural plasticity

Structural plasticity1 pertains to the physical changes in neuronal connections.
It comprises
of changes in synapse numbers, axonal fibre densities, axonal and dendritic branching patterns,
synaptic connectivity patterns, and even neuronal cell numbers [4]. Structural plasticity can be
categorised according to the spatial scale (e.g. synaptic, axonal, network), the temporal scale
(e.g. sub-seconds, minutes, days) and the development period (e.g. sensitive period, childhood,
adulthood). Depending on the development period, we can further categorise it based on the
cause for structural plasticity: hormonal, learning, pathological, injury-induced.

2.1 Spatial scale

Structural plasticity occurs across the whole range of cerebral scales through morphological
changes, such as enlargement, growth or apoptosis, that target spines to axon terminals to glia
[23]. Recent breakthroughs in recording techniques such as in vivo confocal microscopy have
made it possible to gain deeper knowledge onto the underlying mechanisms.

Synapses go through an exuberant growth during early brain development and most of them
will permanently disappear as a result of a competitive process involving neurons, synapses
and neural growth factors [28]. It has further been observed that lesions in adult brains can
lead to an alteration in the synaptic connectivity patterns, due to structural plasticity [29]. Be-
sides sprouting and pruning, structural plasticity can also manifest through neuro-degeneration,
neurogenesis [5] and synaptic rewiring, i.e. modification of existing connections, e.g. dendritic
spines or axonal branches, by dissociating a pre/post synaptic element, and later, linking it to a
different target [30, 31].

Dendritic spines are both highly motile and transient structures. For example, in the barrel
cortex, about two thirds of the spines remain for less than a month while some of them appear
and disappear within a day [30]. It has been observed in mice that spine turnover and stabilisation
can also correlate with learning and memory consolidation, respectively [32].
In addition to
their motility, dendritic spines occur in a wide range of size, shape and organelles, which in turn
potentially affects different functional properties such as, the synaptic strength, its stability, the
postsynaptic receptors, etc [23]. Morphology does indeed have a direct impact on the functional
role, with large spines helping to form stable connections, and the transience of thin spines being
an aid in learning, for instance.

1Before diving into the details of the song-learning circuitry, we first need to briefly review generic concepts and
principles related to structural plasticity. The knowledgeable reader can skip this section and head directly to section 3.

4

Axon arbor structure can be manipulated within a circuit-level mechanism of learning.
In
macaque monkeys, trained to perform a contour detection task, Van Kerkoerle et al. [33] found
that there is an extensive sprouting and pruning of axonal collaterals in cortical regions which
correspond to the trained area of the visual field. In addition to neurogenesis, neurons have the
capacity to degenerate part of their axon in order to refine connections through axon pruning
or more drastically, cell apoptosis [34, 6]. Both, the mechanisms underlying such formation of
short-range or long-range axonal connections as well as the selective degeneration of unoptimal
axonal branches could potentially have long-term impacts on circuit function [35].

At the network level, significant structural changes occur that affect large cerebral regions. For
instance, in blind Braille readers, representation of the reading fingers in the somatosensory cor-
tex is larger than nonreading fingers or any finger of non-Braille readers [36]. Similarly, it has
been shown that a massive reorganization of the motor cortex occurs within a few hours follow-
ing the transection of the facial nerves in the rat [37]. There is, thus, overwhelming evidence
that structural plasticity serves a functional role by manipulating various elements of the cen-
tral nervous system, from spines to synapses to axonal arbors to neurons. We won’t detail adult
neurogenesis since it is beyond the scope of this review, but we redirect the reader to the studies
by Gould [38], Paredes et al. [39] and Pytte [40].

2.2 Time course across development

Structural plasticity can be initiated by several factors at several timepoints in one’s lifespan.
During development, dendritic spines exhibit structural plasticity, by variable sprouting and
pruning, depending on experience. Synaptic turnover is extremely high during this period, and
a majority of newly sprouted dendritic spines in the mice somatosensory cortex, are lost, within
the span of a mere few days [41]. As development of an individual progresses, the course of
puberty also marks some structural changes. The beginning of higher rates of pruning of den-
dritic spines in the human frontal cortex, and cortical thinning in humans have been shown to
correspond with pubertal development [42].

During development, structural plasticity is limited in time by what is known as ‘sensitive pe-
riods’. These periods designate limited periods of time wherein several connections or skills are
modified permanently and significantly, based on the information acquired through experience
[43]. Sensitive periods occur in the prenatal brain and continue throughout development but are
very limited during adulthood. For instance, newly hatched chicks memorize the characteris-
tics of the first moving object they encounter, and subsequently show a preference for it. This
“imprinting” behavior can only be acquired within the first few days following hatching, and
involves age-dependent remodeling of neural networks in the visual and associative areas of the
chicks’ brains [44]. In humans, language acquisition is, often, a highly cognizant and arduous
task for adults, as compared to the relative passive learning by children. It can be argued that,
before the end of puberty, certain neural circuits are more susceptible to assimilating such skills
[45]. A prominent study by Hubel and Wiesel [46] found that closing one eye of kittens, but
not of adult cats, causes the permanent loss of visual responsiveness of neurons in the primary
visual cortex to stimulations to the deprived eye (ocular dominance plasticity). Moreover, axonal
sprouting and branching of thalamic neurons is curbed by visual deprivation during develop-
ment in rodents, and retinal ganglion cells extend their receptive fields in turtles which have
been raised in the dark [4, 47]. Hence, while the beginning and end of sensitive periods are trig-
gered by molecular signals delivered timely during development, sensory experience is crucial
and can modulate the opening and closing of sensitive periods, especially during development
[43, 48].

5

Beyond development as well, structural plasticity has an impactful presence throughout the lifes-
pan of an animal, triggered by various reasons, ranging across hormonal, lesion-induced, patho-
logical and training. Hormonal changes lead to structural changes in neural circuits. Structural
changes in the circuitry is crucial for the seasonal control of reproduction. Morphological rear-
rangements cause seasonal inhibition of a certain hormonal secretion in adult ewes [49]. Similar
hormonal changes can be internally triggered, as in the previous case, or caused due to external
chemical influence. Administration of drugs, such as, amphetamine or methylphenidate alters
the organization of dendrites in the prefrontal cortex, causing reduced play initiation, as well as
impaired working memory functioning [50]. Furthermore, lesions or adverse conditions can in-
duce changes in the network. Lesioning a part of the retina leads to an adjustment in the cortical
topography, by causing the receptive fields of cells in the cortical scotoma to adapt to representing
the retinal area surrounding the lesion [37]. Pathological conditions can cause major upheaval in
the neuronal networks. Uncharacteristically higher spine densities has been observed in certain
parts of the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes in patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder [51].
Continuous exposure or targeted training can also potentially cause structural changes. The dif-
ference in proficiency, between professional musicians, amateur musicians, and non-musicians,
in discriminating tones has been traced to certain structural differences, including the higher
gray matter volume in the left Heschl’s gyrus in musicians [52]. Structural plasticity clearly
plays a sensitive and functional role in several processes during and after development.

2.3 Interaction between structural and functional plasticity

The previous section has demonstrated the ubiquitous presence of structural plasticity across
species and across developmental and spatial scales. Structural plasticity encompasses a variety
of mechanisms that depends on the level under consideration; the processes underlying spine
turnover are very different from the ones that drive axon arborisation [53, 54]. However, such
processes of structural plasticity do not occur in isolation. We find abundant evidences wherein
structural plasticity interacts with the other various forms of plasticity within neural circuits.
As discussed in section 1, plasticity in neural circuits ranges from the alteration of the intrinsic
biophysical properties of a neuron, and the experience-dependent modification of the efficacy
of synaptic transmission, to a massive overhaul of axonal connections within and across brain
regions. Inducing synaptic plasticity not only affects the generation of action potentials by a
neuron but also affects the intrinsic properties of a neuron, such as synaptic integration. For
instance, induction of long-term potentiation in slices of CA1 pyramidal and purkinje neurons
from the rat hippocampus and cerebellum, respectively, has been shown to have strong effects
on the intrinsic excitability of a neuron as well as dendritic integration [55, 56]. Conversely, al-
teration of neuronal excitability, by blocking after-hyperpolarisation (AHP), enhances induction
of long-term potentation in the hippocampal pyramidal neurons [57]. Reduced AHP of pyra-
midal neurons in the rat piriform cortex, following operant conditioning, also has been linked
with improved learning capacity [58]. Similarly, functional and structural plasticity are tightly
inter-connected. Initiation of structural plasticity may be triggered due to an external lesion, or
by an internal hormone release [16]. In this wide landscape, there is an interesting case where
structural plasticity is driven first and foremost by neural activity. De Roo, Klauser, and Muller
[31] observed an increase in spine turnover following induction of long term potentiation in slice
culture of neurons. Further, Oh, Hill, and Zito [59] showed an activity-dependent shrinkage of
dendritic spines. It has been also observed in hippocampal slice cultures that stimulation led to an
increased stabilisation of stimulated synapses and faster pruning of non stimulated synapses [23,
60]. On the other hand, such synaptic pruning can lead to an increased inhibitory nature of the
circuitry, which can have varied impacts. For instance, the late development of an inter-neuron
subset in the primary visual cortex causes the maturation of the inhibitory circuitry which plays

6

a crucial role in the opening and closing of the sensitive period [43]. Thus, we can see that struc-
tural and functional plasticity have a strong mutual interaction, and are both closely related to
the neural activity of the related network. While, in the former examples, a functional change
is able to trigger structural plasticity, in the latter case, structural plasticity shows a prominent
functional impact. At a larger scale, the increase in inhibitory activity curtails the generation of
new synapses and the elimination of existing ones, which ultimately leads to the stabilisation of
the circuitry [61].

These observations suggest that certain instances of structural plasticity stem from functional
changes, and in turn, have the potential to induce a prominent functional impact. It seems more
than relevant to investigate the interactions between structural plasticity, neuronal activity and
the function of the related networks. Given the complex interactions between network structure,
activity and function, theoretical investigations in computational models will likely be required
to shed light on the underlying mechanisms. Structural plasticity has been sporadically incor-
porated into computational models (see section 4). We hypothesise that via such interactions,
structural plasticity could potentially fulfill, not merely an auxiliary role in the functioning of a
circuit (e.g. energy optimisation), but also a more direct role towards facilitating the intended
function of a circuit. We will advocate below that vocal learning in songbirds is a useful paradigm
to understand the implications of structural plasticity on the organization of neural networks
during development and beyond, on the network function and the underlying neural code, and
ultimately on behavior.

3 From structure to neural activity to song

Firstly, we shortly review the analogies between birds and mammals, in both a behavioral and
neuroanatomical sense, and touch on the evidence accumulated in support of the hypothesis that
the two taxa share general principles in the organization of brain networks, the constraints bear-
ing on their construction during development and re-organization following injury or natural
remodeling of brain circuits. Whether these common principles are conserved, or the result of
convergent evolution, is beyond the scope of our review (see [62]). Once the parallels have been
established, we will highlight that structural plasticity is ubiquitous in the bird brain, just as it is
in mammals. We will then focus our survey on the brain circuits involved in the acquisition and
production of complex vocalizations in songbirds, where the relation between neural structure,
activity and function has been best studied. To this end, we briefly describe the vocal learning
circuitry, then delve into the details of structural plasticity in this circuitry and finally extract
computationally useful properties herein. As we will focus our review on structural changes un-
dergone by the song-related network across development and adulthood, we deliberately leave
aside the likely crucial role of functional plasticity in song acquisition and maintenance, discussed
elsewhere [63, 64].

3.1 General behavior and brain anatomy in birds

The successful evolution of mammals in diverse ecological contexts is thought to rely, at least in
part, to the evolution of their large brains, conferring them with behavioral flexibility and cogni-
tive abilities and making them efficient predators and competitors. These cognitive abilities are
diverse and include (but are not limited to) complex sensorimotor coordination and adaptation,
memorization, planning and anticipation capacity, analytical and deductive reasoning, sophisti-
cated social interactions, and introspective judgement. While many of these complex cognitive
skills have first been thought to be the hallmark of humans, or exclusively present in mammals
gifted with large brains, abundant experimental evidence now demonstrates that several bird

7

species also display many, if not all, of the same cognitive functions as mammals [65, 66]. So-
phisticated sensorimotor learning abilities are demonstrated in songbirds by song acquisition,
with remarkable parallels to human speech learning, including its reliance on high auditory pro-
cessing of auditory feedback, tight coordination of vocal muscles and social interactions [67, 63].
Various bird species display food caching behavior and rely on months-old spatial memory traces
to retrieve their spread-out cached food [68], illustrating their excellent episodic-like memoriza-
tion and planning capacities. Tool use and other problem-solving tasks have been successfully
solved by several bird species, many from the corvidae family [69]. Many species of birds, in-
cluding starlings, crows and parrots, have been found to maintain complex social organization
among colonies of thousands (and more) of subjects [70, 71], relying at least partly on vocal com-
munication. Finally, parrots display cognitive abilities that we have until now considered unique
to humans and other primates (conceptual representation, combinatory learning, counting [72])
and magpies can recognize themselves in a mirror [73], a skill thought to require a representation
of oneself and only sparsely present in mammals.

Altogether, the similar cognitive abilities of birds compared to mammals suggest that similar
constraints apply to the organization of their nervous system to optimize their behavior. Studying
the emergence of brain function during development or re-organization in adulthood in birds is,
thus, just as promising as it is to rely on mammalian animal models.

The complex behaviors displayed by birds and briefly summarized above rely on brain circuits
that display, for the most part, major biochemical, anatomical, and physiological differences as
compared to their mammalian counterparts, but still remain surprisingly analogous in their func-
tional organization [62, 66]. Basic avian brain anatomy already differs from that of mammals,
the most notable discrepancy being the absence of a laminated neocortex in the avian telen-
cephalon [74, 75]. Rather, the avian pallium is inherited from the reptilian Dorsal Ventricular
Ridge and is organized into a largely continuous field of nuclei. For this reason, the avian telen-
cephalon has long been considered to mainly consist of a hypertrophied basal ganglia structure
(or paleostriatum, see [76, 77]). While this organization appears very different, the nuclei of the
avian pallium show similar connectivity, neuronal types and functional properties to those of
the mammalian cortex, amygdala, and claustrum. Within this area, birds clearly display a hip-
pocampus, piriform cortex and olfactory bulb. The hyperpallium in birds (previously/also called
the Wulst), also included in this area, displays a strong analogy with the primary visual area and
a primary somatosensory area of the mammalian cortex, in terms of thalamic input, connectivity,
and electrophysiological properties [78]. The Nidopallium contains various auditory areas that
display a similar functional organization as the mammalian auditory cortex, although the spatial
arrangement of the various network components is very different in birds [79, 80]. At a finer
scale, comparative developmental analysis and neurochemical data reveal a surprising extent of
similarities in the neuronal subtypes and among birds and mammals [81, 82].

In the ventral part of the avian telencephalon, ‘subcortical’ structures are older from an evolu-
tionary point of view as compared to the pallium, and therefore share even more similarities
with mammalian subcortical structures. In particular, the avian brain contains homologues of
the mammalian septum, basal ganglia (BG) and several other nuclei, as unveiled by develop-
mental, topological, neurochemical, cellular, connectional and functional data [83]. Moreover, a
modern revision of the avian anatomical nomenclature has now provided a common language
for studying the function of the avian subcortical nuclei [77].

Concerning the BG, there is an avian circuit that has been looked deeper into: the song-related
Indeed, songbirds have specialized a portion of their
BG-thalamo-cortical loop of songbirds.
forebrain–BG circuitry expressly for the purpose of song learning. Recent advances in anatom-

8

ical, physiological and histochemical characterization of avian BG neurons and circuitry have
revealed a homology between this circuit and the mammalian motor loop of the BG-thalamo-
cortical network [84, 76]. In particular, the song-related BG nucleus Area X differs from mam-
malian BG in its gross anatomical structure, but it displays surprisingly similar circuitry at a
finer scale. It is embedded within a region homologous to the mammalian striatum and receives
a particularly strong dopaminergic projection [85].
It contains neuron classes corresponding
electrophysiologically and morphologically to those in the mammalian striatum [86, 87]. In ad-
dition, Area X contains a class of neurons with pallidal properties, which directly project to the
thalamic nucleus DLM [88, 89]. We will focus below on the song-related circuits in songbirds,
including this BG-thalamo-cortical loop.

Given the strong homology (for subcortical structures) or analogy in the organization of brain
circuits driving complex behavior between birds and mammals, it is most likely that the func-
tional organization of these circuits rely on the same basic principles. Therefore, studying the
computational advantages of structural plasticity in birds will improve our understanding of this
basic principle and provide generalizable theories for how development and remodeling acts to
(re)shape brain function. Now, we will discuss the specific case of the vocal learning circuitry in
songbirds.

3.2 Avian vocal learning

For context, we begin by providing a brief overview of the vocal learning process in birds, along
with the related anatomy.

Song acquisition and production

Songbirds use learned vocalizations to communicate during courtship or aggressive behaviors.
Akin to speech learning in humans, vocal learning in young birds requires the coordination of
vocal muscles to reproduce previously experienced adult vocalizations. Singing is a sensorimotor
skill and song acquisition in juvenile birds is also highly dependent on hearing the adults they will
imitate, as well as themselves as they practice, and this dependence wanes as the birds mature.
Strikingly, the gene FoxP2, linked to speech learning in humans [90], is also implicated in avian
song learning [91]. Similar neural mechanisms underlying vocal learning are most probably
involved in humans and birds [67], and the study of these mechanisms in birds could shed light
on the neurobiological bases of speech learning.

Interestingly, in birds, as in humans, imitative vocal learning is characterized by several phases
[67]: (i) the sensory phase enables human infants or juvenile birds to build a neural representa-
tion of adult vocalizations, which will guide later vocal production; (ii) during the sensorimotor
phase the young subjects start to vocalize, initially producing babbling sounds and then adapting
its vocal output to imitate previously heard vocalizations; (iii) finally the produced vocalization
becomes more and more stereotyped and vocal plasticity significantly drops. This final phase is
called crystallization in birds. Each of these phases is bounded by a sensitive period [63]. In most
bird species, if the young subjects have not experienced conspecific adult vocalizations before
a species-specific age limit (e.g. 60 days post hatch (dph 60) in zebra finches, around 2 years
in children), imitation will be virtually impossible because the sensory phase of vocal learning
is closed past that age. Similarly, the sensorimotor phase closes with puberty in many species
(around dph 90 in zebra finches, 12-14 years in humans) when vocal exploration drastically de-
creases (and vocalizations become more stereotyped), making vocal imitation more difficult and
reducing greatly the vocal plasticity. Seasonal birds may re-open the sensorimotor phase yearly
and therefore display cyclic sensitive periods locked to seasonal changes.

9

Figure 1: Schema of the neural substrates involved in vocal learning in zebra finches. The cor-
tical pathway, shown in black, comprising the HVC and RA, is primarily responsible for vocal
production. The anterior forebrain pathway (show in grey), consists of the LMAN, Area X (BG
homologue) and DLM (thalamus homologue) and plays a crucial tutor role in vocal learning.

These sensitive periods and the underlying phases of vocal learning are driven by physiologi-
cal signals that constrain the development of neural circuits in the central nervous system, and
thereby affect the behavioral plasticity. What are the changes undergone during vocal learning
by the related neural circuits? Can we understand the various behavioral phases in light of cir-
cuit changes? In other words, how does structural plasticity related to the development of brain
circuits underlying vocal learning affect the imitation process? We will illustrate below how be-
havioral, anatomical, neurochemical and electrophysiological data collected in songbirds (mostly
in zebra finches) may help bridge the gap between structural plasticity and behavior.

Anatomy of the song system

In birds, the sensorimotor skill of song production and its learning has a dedicated set of inter-
connected brain nuclei collectively known as the “song system” (see Figure 1), that ultimately
coordinate the patterned breathing and vocal muscle activity necessary for vocalization. This
dedicated circuit makes the songbird an outstanding model to study the neural mechanisms of
vocal learning and more generally, the function of neural circuit in sensorimotor learning.

The song system includes a ‘motor pathway’ that is required throughout life for normal song
production, and a BG-thalamo-cortical circuit necessary for song learning, plasticity and main-
tenance, called the ‘anterior forebrain pathway’ [92]. The song system receives auditory infor-
mation through the projections from the high-level auditory areas Field L, NCM (caudo-medial
nidopallium) and CM (caudal mesopallium), and the pallial regions analogous to the auditory
cortices of mammals (see section 3.1), to the nucleus HVC (used as a proper name) [93].

The motor pathway includes the premotor cortical nucleus HVC and the robust nucleus of the

10

arcopallium (RA), which is functionally equivalent to the laryngeal motor cortex. The HVC is
involved in generating the timing and sequencing of song [94, 95]. RA receives inputs from the
HVC and projects directly to respiratory centers and to the brainstem motor neurons control-
ling the vocal organ; the respiratory centers send recurrent information back to the HVC via
the thalamus, reflecting the importance of bidirectional coordination between telencephalic and
brainstem structures in vocal control [96, 97].

The BG-cortical loop indirectly connects the HVC and RA, and like the cortico-basal ganglia cir-
cuitry in mammals, plays a crucial role in motor learning. It consists of three nuclei connected
in a loop: the BG nucleus Area X, the medial portion of the dorsolateral thalamic nucleus (DLM),
and the lateral magnocellular nucleus of the anterior nidopallium (LMAN). This loop is closed
in the macroscopic sense (i.e., the projections form a recursive loop). The LMAN - Area X, Area
X-DLM and DLM - LMAN projections within the loop are topographic [98, 99], thus demon-
strating that this BG-cortical loop is also microscopically closed. The song-related BG nucleus
Area X receives strong dopaminergic innervation from the midbrain [84]. Because this special-
ized cortico–BG circuit is discrete and devoted to a specific well-defined and naturally learned
sensorimotor task rather than a broad range of motor behaviors, it is particularly tractable for
elucidating the interwoven sensory, motor and reward signals carried by BG, and the function
of these signals in skill learning and execution [83].

During song acquisition, the integrity of the song-related BG-cortical loop is required for proper
imitation of adult vocalizations [100, 101]. Although its precise role in song learning has long
remained mysterious, recent experimental studies have shed light on its function during learning.
Multiple lines of experimental evidence support a role of the BG-cortical loop in driving and
modulating acoustic variability in song.
In particular, lesions or inactivations of the cortical
output of the loop (LMAN) reduce the acoustic variability of plastic song in juvenile birds [102,
103] and changing dopaminergic input to the circuit triggers changes in song variability [104].
The song-related BG circuit also guides changes in motor output by generating an error-reducing
motor bias that is rapidly incorporated into the cortical premotor network [105]. In birds, as in
mammals, it is believed that the adaptive motor changes elicited by the BG are learned through a
reinforcement learning mechanism. Accordingly, dopamine delivery in the BG provides an online
evaluation of song quality [106] analogous to reward prediction errors signaled by dopamine
during conditioning in mammals [107]. This dopaminergic signal provides a reinforcement signal
that drives error correction during learning [108, 109]. The dopaminergic input is known to
modulate synaptic plasticity in birds [110], akin to mammals [111]. Thereby, the BG output
implements behavioral adaptations guided by dopaminergic reinforcement signaling to optimize
motor output. These behavioral adaptations are ultimately consolidated in cortical networks
following extensive training [105, 112].

The whole network of brain nuclei involved in song production in songbirds - the song system -
offers a great model for studying brain circuits and their role in behavior. The numerous genes
implicated in human diseases that are enriched in the song system nuclei and exhibit differential
expression, both at specific points in development and during behaviors, such as listening to
song or singing, also opens up interesting paths for the study of pathophysiological processes
[113, 114]. We argue that studying the benefits and consequences of structural plasticity in this
system, through a functional standpoint, may shed light on the general principles that make
structural plasticity advantageous for the central nervous system in the perspective of learning
complex skills.

11

Figure 2: Timeline of development of the vocal learning circuitry in zebra finches [115, 116,
117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122]. The bottom panel shows the axons from HVC entering the RA, to
form the cortical pathway responsible for vocal production, much after the anterior forebrain
pathway (theorised to provide a tutor signal for vocal learning) is completed (bottom panel).
This is accompanied by significant changes in the neural regions involved. During the initial
sensorimotor period, the volume of the RA and HVC increase with a significant decrease in the
LMAN volume, while the synapses within the RA increase, both from HVC axons and from RA
interneurons.
In the later stages of the sensorimotor learning, decreasing song variability is
accompanied with a stabilisation of the volume of the LMAN and HVC and a slight decrease in
RA volume.

12

 VolumeNo. of synapsesRALMAN-RA0102030405060708090RALMANHVCSensory phaseSensorimotor learningHVCRALMANAREA XDLMRADLMLMANAREA XHVCQualitative variationDays post hatch3.3 Structural plasticity in songbirds

Similar to mammals, birds display plasticity from the scale of dendritic spines to synapses to
networks throughout their lifespans, both during development and in adulthood. Internal fac-
tors (such as the concentration of circulating hormones) and external factors (such as daily light
cycles, but also injury or lesion), can trigger plasticity in birds. For instance, the avian olfac-
tory pathway which projects into paralimbic areas, before hatching, is displaced competitively
by the development of visual, auditory and motor pathways after hatching, as a result of higher
audio-visual exposure [123]. Neurogenesis and circuit reorganization is also common in adult
birds. The hippocampus undergoes seasonal neurogenesis and reorganization in food-storing
birds and brood parasites [124], and higher exposure leads migrating species (passerines) to un-
dergo more neurogenesis in areas that process spatial information, than non migratory species
[125]. Interestingly, similar mechanisms underlie adult neurogenesis in both avian and mam-
malian species [97]. The brain circuit where structural plasticity has been most studied in birds
is arguably the song system in songbirds [126]. In this section, we provide a short review on the
current evidence for structural plasticity in the vocal learning circuitry in birds.

During development

Song acquisition happens in juvenile birds while their brain is still in development. As a conse-
quence, the song-related neural circuits are still in the process of being built and there are many
forms of structural plasticity in the network, during the song learning period.

Auditory experience may already have an influence on brain development before hatching [127]
and the auditory pathway from the ears to high auditory areas in the pallium is built early in
development. The anatomical structure of the auditory network is thus largely mature in young
birds when the sensory learning phase starts (dph 20), with all major anatomical connections
being present. Exposure to adult vocalization, at that stage, shapes the auditory responses of
neurons in the high-level auditory nuclei of the pallium where song-selective responses occur
relatively early (before dph 35) [128]. Receiving strong afferents from these auditory nuclei,
neurons in HVC and its efferent structures show a progressive emergence of song selectivity
during the sensory period of song learning [67]. Chen and Meliza [129] demonstrate that during
development, there are significant changes in the phasic excitability in the caudal mesopallium
CM, a cortical auditory region which exhibits selective responses to familiar conspecific songs.
Exposure to tutor song has been shown to induce cell-type specific changes within the ion chan-
nel expression patterns of HVC neurons, depending on whether they project to the RA or the
Area X. These changes happen at a magnitude that can potentially alter network function [130].
Moreover, daytime exposure to tutor song had profound effects on the distributions of inter-spike
intervals of RA bursting activity during sleep, depending on the tutor song [131]. Deafening adult
birds, on the other hand, decreases dendritic spine size and stability of Area X projecting HVC
neurons, along with an increase in mean spontaneous action potential firing rates and decrease
in inter-spike intervals [132]. Daou and Margoliash [133] investigate the intrinsic properties of
Area X projecting HVC neurons further, and discover that birds displaying good copies of their
tutor’s song exhibit similar spike morphology, spike trains, and ion current magnitudes, indicat-
ing that these intrinsic dynamics may be molded by auditory and vocal experience. Additionally,
considering conditioning using distorted auditory feedback also elicits a prominent effect on the
intrinsic properties of HVC neurons in adults, it has been suggested that such intrinsic plasticity
could form an alternate/complementary mechanism for learning via their effect on synaptic ef-
ficacy and network interactions [133, 134]. Further, functional plasticity is likely involved in the
shaping of auditory responses in this network [135]. The synaptic rewiring in HVC is also evi-
denced by a large turnover of dendritic spines early in the sensory learning phase, followed by a

13

rapid stabilisation of spine dynamics [136]. This correlation of circuit changes with tutoring may
indicate a functional role of structural plasticity in sensorimotor learning. On the other hand,
with development, spine turnover in the HVC decreases in untutored birds too. Hence, this stabil-
isation might potentially underlie the closing of a sensitive period, where they are more receptive
to learning behavioural change. The underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms triggering
the changes in plasticity are still under investigation. Interestingly, perineuronal nets surround-
ing groups of neurons and limiting axonal and dendritic processes could mediate changes in
plasticity [137]. Further work is however required to confirm their causal role in the opening
and closing of sensitive periods.

Contrary to the ascending auditory pathway, the song system is highly immature when birds
start the song learning process, and structural plasticity is ongoing both during the sensory and
the early sensorimotor period of song acquisition (Figure 2). Among the two pathways of the
song system, the BG-cortical loop develops first and is fully formed by dph 20, before the senso-
rimotor phase begins [122]. Indeed, in juvenile male zebra finches, at the onset of song learning,
axonal terminals from LMAN enter Area X (dph 20), Area X terminals enter DLM by dph 20
[121], and DLM terminals enter LMAN before dph 15 [120]. This BG-thalamo-cortical circuit is
topographic in nature and reaches maturity before dph 20. [98, 138]. Concerning the input path-
way of the BG-thalamo-cortical loop, HVC neurons projecting to Area X innervate this target by
dph 20 [139, 118]. The output pathway of the loop is also formed early, with LMAN projections
entering the RA by dph 15 [119]. The number of synapses made by LMAN axons onto RA neu-
rons decreases substantially (-70% between dph 20 and 60) over the course of vocal development
[119]. While anatomical connections between the nuclei are stable from dph 20 to adulthood, the
nuclei of the BG-cortical pathway nonetheless experience dramatic volume changes. Between
20 dph and 60 dph, LMAN volume and neuron number decline by 50%, while the volume of Area
X increases by 50%, due to neurogenesis [140, 118] .

The motor pathway, on the contrary, develops very late in the song learning process. First, both
HVC and RA grow slowly, reaching adult size only after dph 40 and dph 70, respectively [117]. In
HVC, the number and size of neurons both increase dramatically [116]. Meanwhile, the synapses
in the RA, from the HVC and LMAN are drastically rearranged at the onset of the sensorimotor
phase. HVC axons reach the dorsal border of RA by dph 15, but, unlike the LMAN, they form
synapses with the RA only between dph 30 and 40 [119, 122]. In the sensorimotor period, between
dph 20 and 60, the reduction of synapses between the LMAN and RA is accompanied by a tripling
of the number of synapses within the RA and an increase of the RA volume [119, 116, 117].

The most striking consequence of the late development of the song system is that the motor
pathway, which drives adult vocalizations, does not contribute to the babbling vocalization, called
subsong, produced by juveniles in the early sensorimotor phase of song learning [141]. At that
stage, the HVC-to-RA pathway is not yet functionally strong enough to drive singing and LMAN
projections are driving subsong-related activity in RA. During the following days, the formation
and strengthening of inputs from HVC to RA leads to the emergence of plastic song, driven both
by LMAN and HVC [119, 142]. As learning progresses, the influence of the LMAN inputs to
the RA reduces due to the strengthening of the synaptic connections from the HVC. Further,
the variability of the song decreases with development and practice (dph 60–90), along with a
significant pruning of the HVC inputs to the RA, albeit with a strengthening of the surviving
connections [142].

14

During seasonal plasticity

Post-development, hormonal changes and external factors continue to induce structural changes
in the brain in many vertebrates beyond the developmental period [143]. Most temperate song-
bird species breed seasonally and display a pronounced seasonal plasticity in their singing behav-
ior [144]. The song initially learned as a juvenile undergoes a pattern of yearly changes triggered
by changes in the light cycle and mediated by sex steroid signaling in the brain [145, 146]. Pro-
ducing highly stereotyped songs during breeding, birds stop singing during the summer molt,
resume singing in fall with short-duration songs of variable structure at lower rate and volume
and gradually sing longer, louder and more stereotyped songs until the next breeding season
[147, 148]. These changes in song are accompanied by a large structural reorganization of the
neural circuits in the song system [149], auditory areas [150] and beyond [151]. This naturally
occurring plasticity in the songbird brain is perhaps the most pronounced observed in any adult
vertebrate. The volume of many song-related brain regions, as well as their number of neurons
and synapses, increase dramatically in anticipation of the breeding season [147, 126], while the
physiological and functional properties of their neurons are altered [152, 153]. The entire vol-
umes of several song nuclei, including HVC, RA and Area X, are considerably larger during the
spring breeding season than during autumn and winter in seasonal birds [154]. The increase in
volume may reflect an addition of new neurons through neurogenesis, notably in the HVC [155,
156], or dendritic growth and synaptogenesis, with an increase in the number of dendritic spines,
as seen in the RA or Area X [157]. Meanwhile, neuron number in LMAN and their inputs to RA
remain relatively constant [158]. Altogether, it is interesting to note that the strengthening of the
HVC-RA pathway before the breeding season recapitulates at least in part the late development
of the motor pathway during song acquisition in juveniles. Interestingly, seasonal plasticity is
regulated by the same endocrine signals as juvenile song learning [159, 160] and may therefore
exploit similar mechanisms as those acting during early ontogeny [161].

3.4 Functional impact of structural plasticity

There are parallels in the manifestation of structural plasticity between mammals and birds. In-
sights drawn from the songbird literature can be used to understand neural circuitry and be-
haviour in mammals, as well. They present an avenue to explore the contributions of changes in
neural circuitry beyond functional plasticity.

Certain fundamental elements of structural plasticity can potentially confer benefits when incor-
porated into computational models. During song learning, there is an early excessive sprouting
of neurons in HVC and RA, followed by a significant pruning of the HVC-RA synapses, and
strengthening of the surviving connections [119]. This form of abundant sprouting followed by
selective pruning is a commonly adopted technique to model changes in network connectivity.
This phenomenon can also be employed to encode the trade off between exploration and exploita-
tion, to represent decreasing tendencies to explore, as learning proceeds [162, 142]. Also, spine
turnover and terminal size can be useful parameters in modeling the consolidation of learned
motor action or behaviour, in lieu of solely modifying synaptic weights [136, 119]. Beyond struc-
tural plasticity, it could also be interesting to consider integrating features of intrinsic plasticity
within computational models, for instance, by simulating the alteration of intrinsic excitability
of a neuron by introducing activity-dependent modifications within the activation functions in
typical neural network models, as suggested by Daou and Margoliash [134].

Apart from the general usage of these basic elements to computationally exploit the proper-
ties of structural plasticity, there are specific insights that can be drawn from vocal learning in
songbirds, where structural plasticity directly has a crucial functional impact on learning. As

15

we have seen in the section 3.3, a common feature of the developmental and seasonal struc-
tural plasticity in the song system is the progressive strengthening of the motor pathway and
its increased synaptic drive on RA neurons compared to the early shaped and steady input from
LMAN. Interestingly, in both cases, induction of large variability in the song by LMAN occurs
in the condition where HVC inputs to RA are not as prominent [163, 141]. The putative effect of
this relative change in the balance of inputs from HVC and LMAN in RA is crucially influencing
the activity of neurons in RA and how they mediate changes in song.

Both in the early phase of juvenile learning and during fall in seasonal songbirds, LMAN drives
variable patterns of activity in RA, resulting in less structured and more variable songs [163, 102].
Accordingly, the singing related activity of RA neurons gradually changes from highly variable
firing patterns to precise and sparse bursts of spikes locked to song motifs during juvenile learn-
ing [164]. LMAN input is necessary for the expression of RA firing variability, and the change
from variable to stereotyped firing patterns in RA throughout development could be explained
by the strengthening and pruning of HVC inputs to RA (that drive stereotyped patterns) while
LMAN inputs remain unchanged [142]. As HVC input to RA becomes larger, it drives stronger
bursting in RA interleaved with hyperpolarized periods of silence due to recurrent inhibition
[164]. LMAN inputs to RA are mediated mostly through voltage-dependent NMDA receptors
[165, 102], and its influence on RA firing is weak in this condition. The influence of LMAN on
RA is thus diminished, resulting in a progressively more stereotyped song [102]. Interestingly,
this scenario does not require any seasonal or developmental modification in the BG–forebrain
circuit to see its influence on song strongly modulated. It ensures that LMAN-driven variability
is expressed long before the HVC driven temporal structure of the song motif emerges, and likely
results in the two-phase learning, including early babbling in subsong followed by temporally
structured plastic song.

The strong influence of the LMAN on the RA early in development initially drives subsong and
then drives the variability in plastic song; thereafter, HVC plays an increasingly strong role in
driving the stereotyped firing of RA as the bird approaches crystallization. The same scenario
seems to be recapitulated at least partially during seasonal plasticity due to the regrowth of HVC
and the entrance of new axons in RA. Why is HVC input arriving so late in the RA during song
acquisition or during seasonal relearning? And why is learning divided in these two phases -
babbling and plastic song? In the next section, we draw a parallel with optimisation techniques,
commonly used in machine learning, to investigate the potential roles of these phenomena in
sensorimotor learning.

4 From biology to machine learning

We have seen that structural plasticity is shared among different species, occurs (non-uniformly)
across the whole lifespan and scales from the level of dendritic spines up to distributed cortical
regions. It leads us to question why plasticity of this kind is as prevalent, and if it confers any ben-
efits to the development of neural circuitry. Models of experience-dependent structural plasticity
have shown that rules of dendritic and synaptic growth, derived from experimental data [166],
improve information transmission in networks with small-world topology (i.e. high clustering
coefficients and short path lengths) [167]. Knoblauch et al. [168] simulate structural plasticity by
accommodating potential future synapses and find that this leads to a higher storage capacity per
synapse than networks with only synaptic weight plasticity. Moreover, Chechik, Meilijson, and
Ruppin [24] show that energy efficiency of memory storage, indeed, is improved by using the
strategy of excessive sprouting followed by synaptic pruning. Structural plasticity can also influ-
ence the development of synaptic connectivity within networks. Poirazi and Mel [169] show that

16

memory formation or long-term information storage might also be governed by the co-activation
of synapses on a shared dendritic branch rather than merely synaptic weights. Stepanyants, Hof,
and Chklovskii [170] complement this study, using geometric analysis to demonstrate that den-
dritic spines improve information capacity by increasing the specificity of dendritic connections.
Sailor et al. [171] further demonstrate the functional role of dendritic arborisation of adult-born
granule cell inter-neurons in the olfactory bulbs of adults. Simulations by Spiess et al. [27] show
that structural plasticity improves learning by decreasing response noise, and when combined
with pruning, also reduces the training time. Further, models such as Lightheart, Grainger, and
Lu [172] incorporate the effect of structural plasticity by using constructive algorithms to sim-
ulate network growth which also account for the creation of new neurons. Such comparatively
slower structural plasticity could balance the trade-off between stability and plasticity in order
to help evade catastrophic forgetting [26, 168]. Knoblauch, Palm, and Sommer [173] further
demonstrate that this strategy also helps optimise information capacity in biological networks
[174].

Despite these clear advantages of incorporating structural plasticity, it has seldom been used in
machine learning and computational neuroscience literature. Most of the time, the architecture
of a model is chosen prior to the learning phase and remains fixed until the end. There are
of course notable exceptions. One of the earliest and best known example of a computational
model taking full advantage of structural plasticity is the growing neural gas model [175] that
learns the topology of the input thanks to the dynamic topology of the network. Connections
between units can be created or removed dynamically during the learning phase according to
a precise criterion that depends on both the data and the history of the model. This dynamic
reconfiguration allows the model to faithfully map the topology of the data as opposed to, for
example, a regular self-organising map [176] that uses a fixed topology.

A couple of years before this model was introduced, pruning algorithms [177] were popularized
by the Optimal Brain Damage algorithm [178] that aim at finding the optimal size (in terms of
the number of connections) of a feed-forward model in order to establish a trade-off between the
complexity and the error magnitude of the resulting model. This algorithm starts from a fully
connected feed-forward model (multi-layer perceptron) and removes, after training, the weights
that have the lowest saliency. With the advent of deep-learning during the past decade and the
inflating size of models, there has been a renewed interest in such pruning techniques [179].
However, pruning is the simpler side of structural plasticity since you start from a situation
where you can objectify the influence of a neuron A onto a neuron B based on the existence of
a connection between them. The careful analysis of this influence can then help to decide if the
connection can be removed or not.

On the other hand, the case of sprouting is quite different because there is a need to establish a
new connection between a neuron A and a neuron B that are, by definition, not connected. This
implies that, from a structural point of view, this selection cannot be based on the correlation of
activity, for instance, since no connection exists. Hence, one obvious way to perform the selec-
tion is to randomly choose the source and the target. This is the technique used in a number of
generative models that search for the best architecture [180]. There exist however non random
techniques, such as marker induction, as proposed by [181]. In this model, markers are used to
induce presynaptic fibers to connect to the post-synaptic sheet. This results in a neighbouring
presynaptic region to connect to a neighbouring postsynaptic region in an ordered fashion and
this model is used to explain the formation of ordered retinotectal projections in amphibians and
fishes. There exist similar models for the development of the retino-geniculo cortical pathway
[182] and more generally, the formation of topographic maps [183, 184]. In addition to several
widely applicable advantages of structural plasticity such as optimising energy consumption (as

17

discussed in section 4), structural plasticity, in the case of topographic maps (e.g. visual maps),
can help to embed pattern of synaptic strengths in the network topology [185] and may explain the
existence of a critical period as well. However, from a computational point of view, the advantage
of such structural plasticity compared to, for instance, an initially fully connected model that is
later pruned, is not clear. Departing from the pure formation of topographical maps, the model
by Kappel et al. [186] explains and exploits structural plasticity to give a functional account on
the development of a dedicated architecture for solving reward based tasks. As explained by
the authors, this model uses reward-driven network plasticity as continuous sampling of network
configurations that results in policy sampling. This model is interesting because it provides a
functional interpretation of structural plasticity and justifies its presence. Without such plastic-
ity, it would be more difficult or longer for the model to solve the task. However, we suggest
that the functional role of the sprouting phase should be considered beyond the formation of
topographic maps.

Now while several advantages of structural plasticity have been noted across the literature, rang-
ing from energy efficiency to optimisation of information storage (as discussed in section 4), we
investigate if structural plasticity, within a specific circuitry, contributes directly to the function
of said circuitry. In order to look into the potential direct functional advantages of structural
plasticity, we scrutinize a hypothesis that is gaining popularity in the literature. This hypothe-
sis states that the development of automatized skills, such as song production, is driven by the
basal ganglia through dopamine-modulated reinforcement learning in order to guide learning in
a parallel cortical pathway, which eventually governs the production of the skill [187, 188, 105].

From a theoretical perspective, this can be considered as a dual learning system, one is reactive
and dependent on instantaneous reward (reinforcement learning) while the other is much slower
and independent of reward but can strongly bias the output. Reinforcement learning builds an
approximation of the local error contour via its exploration techniques, and can implement gra-
dient descent in its pursuit to maximize the expected reward (or minimise the error) [189]. A
strong parallel can be drawn between such a system and the notion of momentum in the field
of machine learning. Momentum is a simple and popular technique in supervised learning for
improving stochastic gradient descent and to escape local minima [190]. This technique averages
the last few gradients in order to maintain a consistent direction of the gradient. This has been
proven to work better and faster than pure stochastic gradient descent. Very recently, such usage
of momentum has been adapted to the framework of reinforcement learning in the case of the
value iteration algorithm [191] but the technique can be adapted to any reinforcement learning
algorithm, including actor-critic architectures. For this latter case, it is a matter of replacing the
critic by the average of successive critics.

Now, we hypothesise a role for structural plasticity in directly aiding the process of song learn-
ing, by building an analogy between momentum-guided reinforcement learning and the dual
pathway hypothesis for avian vocal learning. As we have seen in earlier sections, in the case of
songbirds, the vocal learning circuitry comprises of two parallel pathways. The primary cortical
motor pathway (involving the HVC and RA) is believed to be responsible for controlling song
generation, while a secondary BG-thalamo-cortical pathway (involving the LMAN, Area X and
DLM) functions as a tutor and sends signals to influence the course of vocal production. Area X
receives strong dopaminergic innervation from the midbrain, which provides an online evalua-
tion of song quality [85]. Moreover, there is experimental evidence showing activity-dependent
synaptic plasticity at HVC and LMAN projections to spiny neurons in area X [192]. Thus, along
with LMAN-driven variability, Area X forms an ideal site to facilitate reinforcement learning. On
the other hand, activity dependent synaptic potentiation and depression have also been described
at the HVC-RA synapses[193]. This provides an avenue for synaptic plasticity based on Hebbian

18

Figure 3: Momentum guided reinforcement learning can be understood using an analogy of ve-
In this illustration, velocity corresponds to Hebbian learning, which
locity and acceleration.
represents the momentum of the trajectory, while acceleration corresponds to reinforcement
learning and can modify the velocity vector up to a certain degree (10% in the figure). The il-
lustration simulates the trajectory from a fixed initial position to a target, when the direction
of the velocity is continually modified by the acceleration. In the figure, four trajectories with
increasing initial delays (left to right) are shown. These delays correspond to the moment when
velocity is activated/allowed to initiate the trajectory. Before that, the acceleration influences the
direction of the velocity, however without any displacement. When there’s no delay, the initial
velocity vector can potentially drive the trajectory away from the target (as shown in this specific
example), while with longer delays, the acceleration can explore and identify a more conducive
direction in order to exhibit a more direct trajectory to the target.

learning, or co-activation of pre-synaptic and post-synaptic terminals, within the cortical motor
pathway. Models such as Tes¸ileanu, ¨Olveczky, and Balasubramanian [194], also, use STDP-like
learning mechanisms, modulated by the parallel BG pathway, to describe the functioning of the
cortical pathway. Similar to the mammalian literature discussed above, there is a range of em-
pirical evidence to support the hypothesis that the tutor signals from the BG-thalamo-cortical
pathway guide song learning and are eventually consolidated within the cortical pathway[102,
164]. In addition to the synaptic plasticity described in the two parallel pathways, as discussed
previously, it has been observed that the HVC axons wait at the dorsal border of RA and enter the
RA to form synapses only after the formation of the BG-thalamo-cortical loop [119, 122]. This
leads us to investigate if this delayed circuit completion, induced by structural plasticity, might,
in fact, have a crucial functional role in the process of vocal learning using the dual pathway
architecture.

Drawing an analogy with momentum-guided reinforcement learning, the BG pathway biases
the motor output towards the target syllable using reinforcement learning, akin to the role of
acceleration in the aforementioned illustration, as both play the role of modulating the direction
of the system. The growth of the slower and more stable cortical pathway can be compared to
the role of velocity, where both maintain a steady direction in the learning phase. They provide
a central locus around which acceleration/the BG loop are able to explore locally and bias the
output. The local changes made by acceleration/the BG loop are gradually incorporated and con-
solidated within velocity/the cortical pathway. Within this analogy, we extend the findings of the
illustration to the dual pathway system. We have observed that the slowly-modulated velocity
parameter can govern the direction of the system, and can thus provide the momentum required
to escape local minima by countering the effect of the acceleration parameter that would prefer-
entially guide the system towards the local minima. This overshooting of shallow local minima in
an attempt to reach the global minimum could be a potential role fulfilled by the development of
the cortical pathway and the transfer of information from the sub-cortical to cortical pathways.
Moreover, in the absence of momentum (as simulated using initiation delays), acceleration can

19

InitialpositionTargetDelay 0InitialpositionTargetDelay 20InitialpositionTargetDelay 40InitialpositionTargetDelay 60exercise comparatively greater influence over velocity, which could, in turn, help find a more
conducive direction for the system to begin its trajectory. Thus, during the early babbling stage
of vocal learning, where the BG loop is formed, but the cortical pathway isn’t yet fully formed,
the avian BG can explore the sensorimotor space and find a desirable direction with respect to
the local contour. Such early exploration would result in the system moving more rapidly in the
chosen direction, eventually, when momentum kicks in or, in this case, when the HVC axons
innervate the RA. Considering the cortical motor pathway to implement an equivalent of the
notion of momentum, it might be necessary for this pathway to be active only after the initial
direction of the gradient is determined. The alternative being a momentum, in a random ini-
tial direction, that may cause delays in learning, or ultimately drive the learning away from the
actual target. Hence, the developmental delay facilitates an initial period of high exploration,
which could be hindered by the presence of a comparatively change-resistant cortical pathway.
The delay in the development of cortical pathway, thus, might have a crucial role in control-
ling the exploration-exploitation trade-off by allowing for an initial predominantly exploratory
phase, while additionally assisting in escaping local minima in the later stages of sensorimotor
learning. Providing this auxiliary support to gradient descent could be a potential functional
role for the otherwise unaccountable delay observed in the innervation of RA neurons by HVC
axons.

The comparison of the structural plasticity within the cortical motor pathway with the technique
of momentum is also in agreement with a prevalent hypothesis (discussed in section 3) that the
innervation of RA by the HVC axons causes an increased inhibitory nature of the RA, which in
turn diminishes the influence of the mainly NMDA receptor-based LMAN inputs to the RA [142,
164]. The development of the cortical pathway, thus, slowly diminishes the exploratory LMAN
influence and, over time renders the vocal production to be more stereotypical in nature.

While this hypothesis might be difficult to test at the experimental level, it is much more feasi-
ble to simulate a comparison between a random initial momentum and a late gradient-directed
momentum. Our prediction is that in the former case, learning would be deeply hindered, as
illustrated in Figure 3, using an accelerated velocity analogy. It is to be noted that the illustra-
tion has been made in 2D and may misleadingly suggest that the initial velocity vector has a fair
chance of pointing in the right direction. However, in higher dimensions, this probability would
be much lower and therefore, the delay in the activation of the Hebbian-based pathway would
be functionally critical 2.

5 Conclusion

Beyond the specific case of birds, for which non-seasonal structural plasticity has been hypothe-
sised to be critical for both acquisition and automatization in juvenile songbirds, we may question
to what extent such structural plasticity is similarly critical in vertebrates and more specifically,
in mammals. The similarity in brain organization between birds and mammals is indeed striking,
especially when considering the cortex-basal ganglia loop. We explained in [196] how the devel-
opment of automatized skills relies on the BG teaching cortical circuits and is actually a late feature
linked with the development of a specialized cortex or pallium that evolved in parallel in different
taxa. Alongside this hypothesis, there is a growing number of computational models of decision
making that takes into account this dual pathway hypothesis, where the BG acts as a general
training machine for cortico-cortical connections [112]. In this context, it is natural to wonder
if the initial delay in connection might exist as well in other species and if this would provide

2The scripts are available on https://github.com/rsankar9/Review-momentum-illustration and archived in a Zen-

odo repository https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4063714 [195]

20

a similar benefit in early learning. In humans, this would correspond to the phase preceding
the babbling phase that is known to be characterized by rapid structural and functional changes.
However, as explained by Vasung et al. [197], the study of early human brain development re-
mains a challenge.

Beyond the interactions between the basal ganglia and the cortex, other learning-related brain
circuits function with a ‘two-stage’ learning process where the initial learning stages rely on
subcortical structures while long-term memory is imprinted in neocortical areas through on-
line and/or off-line training of cortical networks by the subcortical regions. Concerning motor
learning, BG and cerebellar circuits may teach neocortical motor areas where the motor pro-
grams are engrained for long-term storage of motor tasks [198]. Here, we have shown how
BG motor output matures earlier than cortico-cortical connections in songbirds, and how this
may be beneficial for song learning. Similarly, the cerebello-neocortical circuit driving motor
cerebellar-dependent learning may mature before the cortico-cortical connection in motor ar-
eas of the motor cortex are mature enough to store the motor memories. Purely speculative,
this hypothesis could be tested experimentally by comparing the contribution of cerebellar and
neocortical circuits to motor learning across development. Whether delaying the maturation of
cortico-cortical connections benefits learning could be tested further in theoretical models of the
BG-cortical and cerebello-cortical networks [199].

For declarative memory, the experimentally confirmed ‘two-stage’ theory [200, 201, 202] posits
that new memories are transiently encoded in the hippocampus before they are gradually trans-
ferred in the prefrontal cortex for long-term retention. The hippocampus has appeared before the
neocortex in evolution, and it is tempting to speculate that ontogeny partially recapitulates evo-
lution with an early maturation of hippocampal circuits involved in declarative memory before
the maturation of the prefrontal cortex, which only terminates in adolescence or even later [203].
Such two-stage motor learning and episodic memory formation continues in adulthood, albeit
with diminished influence of the cerebullum and hippocampus, respectively. Whether such two-
stage developmental process could be beneficial for the development of memory circuits, during
development, remains to be investigated both experimentally and theoretically.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Nicolas Giret and Dr. Thomas Boraud for their valuable feedback on the manuscript.

Funding

This work was partially funded by grant ANR-17-CE24-0036 and ANR-16-CE37-0020-01.

References

1. A. Citri and R. C. Malenka. “Synaptic plasticity: Multiple forms, functions, and mechanisms.” In: Neuropsy-

chopharmacology 33.1 (2008), pp. 18–41.

2. D. Debanne. “Plasticity of neuronal excitability in vivo.” In: Journal of Physiology 587.13 (2009), pp. 3057–3058.
3. D. V. Buonomano and M. M. Merzenich. “Cortical plasticity: From synapses to maps.” In: Annual Review of

Neuroscience 21 (1998), pp. 149–186.

4. M. Butz, F. W¨org¨otter, and A. van Ooyen. “Activity-dependent structural plasticity.” In: Brain Research Reviews

5.

60.2 (2009), pp. 287–305.
P. M. Lledo, M. Alonso, and M. S. Grubb. “Adult neurogenesis and functional plasticity in neuronal circuits.”
In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience 7.3 (2006), pp. 179–193.

6. C. Portera-Cailliau, R. M. Weimer, V. De Paola, P. Caroni, and K. Svoboda. “Diverse modes of axon elaboration

in the developing neocortex.” In: PLoS Biology 3.8 (2005).

21

7.

8.

9.

P. R. Huttenlocher et al. “Synaptic density in human frontal cortex-developmental changes and effects of
aging.” In: Brain Res 163.2 (1979), pp. 195–205.
P. R. Huttenlocher, C. de Courten, L. J. Garey, and H. Van der Loos. “Synaptogenesis in human visual cor-
tex—evidence for synapse elimination during normal development.” In: Neuroscience letters 33.3 (1982), pp. 247–
252.
P. S. Eriksson, E. Perfilieva, T. Bj¨ork-Eriksson, A.-M. Alborn, C. Nordborg, D. A. Peterson, and F. H. Gage.
“Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus.” In: Nature medicine 4.11 (1998), pp. 1313–1317.

13.

11.
12.

10. A. Datwani, T. Iwasato, S. Itohara, and R. S. Erzurumlu. “NMDA Receptor-Dependent Pattern Transfer from
Afferents to Postsynaptic Cells and Dendritic Differentiation in the Barrel Cortex.” In: Molecular Cell Neuro-
science 21.3 (2002), pp. 477–492.
R. B. Livingston. “Brain Mechanisms in Conditioning and Learning.” In: 4.3 (1966), pp. 235–347.
R. H. Wurtz, V. F. Castellucci, and J. M. Nusrala. “Synaptic Plasticity: The Effect of the Action Potential in the
Postsynaptic Neuron.” In: Experimental Neurology 18.3 (1967), pp. 350–368.
T. V. Bliss and T. Lomo. “Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate area of the unanaes-
thetized rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path.” In: The Journal of Physiology 232.2 (1973), pp. 331–
356.
F. W. Kerr. “Structural and functional evidence of plasticity in the central nervous system.” In: Experimental
Neurology 48.3 PART 2 (1975), pp. 16–31.
L. T. Rutledge. “The effects of denervation and stimulation upon synaptic ultrastructure.” In: Journal of Com-
parative Neurology 178.1 (1978), pp. 117–128.

14.

15.

16. A. van Ooyen and E. Butz-Ostendorf Markus. The rewiring brain: a computational approach to structural plas-

ticity in the adult brain. Academic Press, 2017.

17. H. Markram, J. L¨ubke, M. Frotscher, and B. Sakmann. “Regulation of synaptic efficacy by coincidence of post-

synaptic APs and EPSPs.” In: Science 275.5297 (1997), pp. 213–215.

18. G.-q. Bi and M.-m. Poo. “Synaptic modifications in cultured hippocampal neurons: dependence on spike tim-
ing, synaptic strength, and postsynaptic cell type.” In: Journal of neuroscience 18.24 (1998), pp. 10464–10472.
19. W. Gerstner, R. Kempter, J. L. Van Hemmen, and H. Wagner. “A neuronal learning rule for sub-millisecond

temporal coding.” In: Nature 383.6595 (1996), pp. 76–78.

20. M. Hartley, N. Taylor, and J. Taylor. “Understanding spike-time-dependent plasticity: A biologically motivated

computational model.” In: Neurocomputing 69.16-18 (2006), pp. 2005–2016.

21. H. Z. Shouval, M. F. Bear, and L. N. Cooper. “A unified model of NMDA receptor-dependent bidirectional
synaptic plasticity.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99.16 (2002), pp. 10831–10836.
22. G. M. Innocenti and D. J. Price. “Exuberance in the development of cortical networks.” In: Nature Reviews

23.

Neuroscience 6.12 (2005), pp. 955–965.
Y. Bernardinelli, I. Nikonenko, and D. Muller. “Structural plasticity: Mechanisms and contribution to develop-
mental psychiatric disorders.” In: Frontiers in Neuroanatomy 8.November (2014), pp. 1–9.

24. G. Chechik, I. Meilijson, and E. Ruppin. “Synaptic pruning in development: a computational account.” In:

Neural computation 10.7 (1998), pp. 1759–1777.

25. D. B. Chklovskii, B. Mel, and K. Svoboda. “Cortical rewiring and information storage.” In: Nature 431.7010

(2004), pp. 782–788.

26. A. Knoblauch and F. T. Sommer. “Structural plasticity, effectual connectivity, and memory in cortex.” In: Fron-

tiers in neuroanatomy 10 (2016), p. 63.
R. Spiess, R. George, M. Cook, and P. U. Diehl. “Structural plasticity denoises responses and improves learning
speed.” In: Frontiers in computational neuroscience 10 (2016), p. 93.
J. V. Le B´e and H. Markram. “Spontaneous and evoked synaptic rewiring in the neonatal neocortex.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103.35 (2006), pp. 13214–13219.

29. G. Raisman. “Neuronal plasticity in the septal nuclei of the adult rat.” In: Brain Research 14.1 (1969), pp. 25–48.
J. T. Trachtenberg, B. E. Chen, G. W. Knott, G. Feng, J. R. Sanes, E. Welker, and K. Svoboda. “Long-term in vivo
30.
imaging of experience-dependent synaptic plasticity in adult cortex.” In: Nature 420.6917 (2002), pp. 788–794.
31. M. De Roo, P. Klauser, and D. Muller. “LTP promotes a selective long-term stabilization and clustering of

dendritic spines.” In: PLoS Biology 6.9 (2008), pp. 1850–1860.
T. Xu, X. Yu, A. J. Perlik, W. F. Tobin, J. A. Zweig, K. Tennant, T. Jones, and Y. Zuo. “Rapid formation and
selective stabilization of synapses for enduring motor memories.” In: Nature 462.7275 (2009), pp. 915–919.
T. Van Kerkoerle, S. A. Marik, S. M. Z. A. Borgloh, and C. D. Gilbert. “Axonal plasticity associated with per-
ceptual learning in adult macaque primary visual cortex.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 115.41 (2018), pp. 10464–10469.

27.

28.

32.

33.

34. M. J. Geden, S. E. Romero, and M. Deshmukh. “Apoptosis versus Axon Pruning: Molecular Intersection of Two

Distinct Pathways for Axon Degeneration.” In: (2019), pp. 3–8.

35. M. Tessier-Lavigne and C. S. Goodman. “The Molecular Biology of Axon Guidance.” In: Science 274.5290 (1996),

pp. 1123–1133. eprint: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/274/5290/1123.full.pdf.

22

36. A. Pascual-Leone and F. Torres. “Plasticity of the sensorimotor cortex representation of the reading finger in

braille readers.” In: Brain 116.1 (1993), pp. 39–52.

37. C. D. Gilbert. “Adult cortical dynamics.” In: Physiological Reviews 78.2 (1998), pp. 467–485.
38.

E. Gould. “How widespread is adult neurogenesis in mammals?” In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience 8.6 (2007),
pp. 481–488.

39. M. F. Paredes, S. F. Sorrells, J. M. Garcia-Verdugo, and A. Alvarez-Buylla. “Brain size and limits to adult neu-

rogenesis.” In: Journal of Comparative Neurology 524.3 (2016), pp. 646–664.

40. C. L. Pytte. “Adult neurogenesis in the songbird: Region-specific contributions of new neurons to behavioral

41.

42.

43.

44.

plasticity and stability.” In: Brain, Behavior and Evolution 87.3 (2016), pp. 191–204.
E. Bufill, J. Agust´ı, and R. Blesa. “Human neoteny revisited: The case of synaptic plasticity.” In: American
Journal of Human Biology 23.6 (2011), pp. 729–739.
J. R. Boivin, D. J. Piekarski, A. W. Thomas, and L. Wilbrecht. “Adolescent pruning and stabilization of dendritic
spines on cortical layer 5 pyramidal neurons do not depend on gonadal hormones.” In: Developmental Cognitive
Neuroscience 30.January (2018), pp. 100–107.
T. K. Hensch. “Critical period plasticity in local cortical circuits.” In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6.11 (2005),
pp. 877–888.
T. Nakamori, F. Maekawa, K. Sato, K. Tanaka, and H. Ohki-Hamazaki. “Neural basis of imprinting behavior in
chicks.” In: Development, Growth & Differentiation 55.1 (Jan. 2013), pp. 198–206.

45. M. H. Patton, J. A. Blundon, and S. S. Zakharenko. “Rejuvenation of plasticity in the brain: opening the critical

period.” In: Current Opinion in Neurobiology 54 (2019), pp. 83–89.

46. D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel. “Brain mechanisms of vision.” In: Scientific American 241.3 (1979), pp. 150–162.
47. K. P. Berry and E. Nedivi. “Experience-dependent structural plasticity in the visual system.” In: Annual review

48.

of vision science 2 (2016), pp. 17–35.
Y. Yazaki-Sugiyama. “Neuronal mechanisms regulating the critical period of sensory experience-dependent
song learning.” In: Neuroscience Research 140 (2019), pp. 53–58.

49. M. Migaud, M. Batailler, D. Pillon, I. Franceschini, and B. Malpaux. “Seasonal changes in cell proliferation in

the adult sheep brain and pars tuberalis.” In: Journal of Biological Rhythms 26.6 (2011), pp. 486–496.
B. Kolb and R. Gibb. Brain Plasticity and Behaviour in the Developing Brain. 2011.

50.
51. M. P. Forrest, E. Parnell, and P. Penzes. “Dendritic structural plasticity and neuropsychiatric disease.” In: Nature

52.

Reviews Neuroscience 19.4 (2018), pp. 215–234.
S. Steven and C. Blakemore. “Cortical Plasticity in the Adult Human Brain.” In: The cognitive neurosciences (3rd
ed.). (2004), pp. 1243–1254.

53. M. Bosch and Y. Hayashi. “Structural plasticity of dendritic spines.” In: Current opinion in neurobiology 22.3

54.

55.

(2012), pp. 383–388.
T. L. Lewis Jr, J. Courchet, and F. Polleux. “Cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying axon formation,
growth, and branching.” In: Journal of Cell Biology 202.6 (2013), pp. 837–848.
E. Campanac and D. Debanne. “Spike timing-dependent plasticity: a learning rule for dendritic integration in
rat CA1 pyramidal neurons.” In: The Journal of physiology 586.3 (2008), pp. 779–793.

56. A. Belmeguenai, E. Hosy, F. Bengtsson, C. M. Pedroarena, C. Piochon, E. Teuling, Q. He, G. Ohtsuki, M. T.
De Jeu, Y. Elgersma, et al. “Intrinsic plasticity complements long-term potentiation in parallel fiber input gain
control in cerebellar Purkinje cells.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 30.41 (2010), pp. 13630–13643.
P. Sah and J. M. Bekkers. “Apical dendritic location of slow afterhyperpolarization current in hippocampal
pyramidal neurons: implications for the integration of long-term potentiation.” In: Journal of Neuroscience
16.15 (1996), pp. 4537–4542.

57.

58. D. Saar, Y. Grossman, and E. Barkai. “Reduced after-hyperpolarization in rat piriform cortex pyramidal neu-
rons is associated with increased learning capability during operant conditioning.” In: European Journal of
Neuroscience 10.4 (1998), pp. 1518–1523.

59. W. C. Oh, T. C. Hill, and K. Zito. “Synapse-specific and size-dependent mechanisms of spine structural plas-
ticity accompanying synaptic weakening.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 110.4 (2013).
B. Leuner and E. Gould. “Structural plasticity and hippocampal function.” In: Annual review of psychology 61
(2010), pp. 111–140.

60.

61. N. Schaefer et al. “The malleable brain: plasticity of neural circuits and behavior – a review from students to

students.” In: Journal of Neurochemistry 142.6 (2017), pp. 790–811.

62. O. G¨unt¨urk¨un. “The convergent evolution of neural substrates for cognition.” In: Psychological Research 76.2

(2012), pp. 212–219.
R. Mooney. “Neural mechanisms for learned birdsong.” In: Learning and Memory 16.11 (2009), pp. 655–669.

63.
64. K. Tschida and R. Mooney. “The role of auditory feedback in vocal learning and maintenance.” In: Current

65. O. G¨unt¨urk¨un and T. Bugnyar. “Cognition without Cortex.” In: Trends in Cognitive Sciences 20.4 (2016), pp. 291–

Opinion in Neurobiology 22.2 (2012), pp. 320–327.

303.

23

66. H. J. Karten. “Vertebrate brains and evolutionary connectomics: On the origins of the mammalian ‘neocortex’.”

In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 370.1684 (2015).

67. A. J. Doupe and P. K. Kuhl. “BIRDSONG AND HUMAN SPEECH: Common Themes and Mechanisms.” In:

Annual Review of Neuroscience 22.1 (1999), pp. 567–631.

68. D. F. Sherry and J. S. Hoshooley. “Seasonal hippocampal plasticity in food-storing birds.” In: Philosophical

Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 365.1542 (2010), pp. 933–943.

69. G. F. Striedter. “Bird brains and tool use: Beyond instrumental conditioning.” In: Brain, Behavior and Evolution

70.

71.

72.

82.1 (2013), pp. 55–67.
P. H. Boucherie, M. C. Loretto, J. J. Massen, and T. Bugnyar. “What constitutes “social complexity” and “social
intelligence” in birds? Lessons from ravens.” In: Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 73.1 (2019).
P. A. Downing, A. S. Griffin, and C. K. Cornwallis. “Group formation and the evolutionary pathway to complex
sociality in birds.” In: Nature Ecology and Evolution 4.3 (2020), pp. 479–486.
I. M. Pepperberg. “Cognitive and communicative abilities of Grey parrots.” In: Applied Animal Behaviour Sci-
ence 100.1-2 (Oct. 2006), pp. 77–86.

73. H. Prior, A. Schwarz, and O. Gunturkun. “Mirror-Induced Behavior in the Magpie (Pica pica): Evidence of

Self-Recognition.” In: Plos One 6.8 (2008), pp. 1642–1650.

74. O. G¨unt¨urk¨un. “The avian ’prefrontal cortex’ and cognition.” In: Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15.6 (2005),

pp. 686–693.

75. C. Herold, P. Schl¨omer, I. Mafoppa-Fomat, J. Mehlhorn, K. Amunts, and M. Axer. “The hippocampus of birds

in a view of evolutionary connectomics.” In: Cortex 118 (2019), pp. 165–187.

76. A. Reiner, L. Medina, and C. L. Veenman. “Structural and functional evolution of the basal ganglia in verte-

brates.” In: Brain Research Reviews 28.3 (1998), pp. 235–285.

77. A. Reiner et al. “Revised Nomenclature for Avian Telencephalon and Some Related Brainstem Nuclei.” In:

78.

79.

Journal of Comparative Neurology 473.3 (2004), pp. 377–414. arXiv: NIHMS150003.
L. Medina and A. Reiner. “Do birds possess homologues of mammalian primary visual, somatosensory and
motor cortices?” In: Evolution of Nervous Systems 23 (2000), pp. 1–12.
Y. Wang, A. Brzozowska-Prechtl, and H. J. Karten. “Laminar and columnar auditory cortex in avian brain.” In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107.28 (2010), pp. 12676–12681.
80. A. Calabrese and S. M. Woolley. “Coding principles of the canonical cortical microcircuit in the avian brain.”
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112.11 (2015), pp. 3517–3522.
81. A. B. Butler, A. Reiner, and H. J. Karten. “Evolution of the amniote pallium and the origins of mammalian

neocortex.” In: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1225.1 (2011), pp. 14–27.
J. F. Montiel, N. A. Vasistha, F. Garcia-Moreno, and Z. Moln´ar. “From sauropsids to mammals and back: New
approaches to comparative cortical development.” In: Journal of Comparative Neurology 524.3 (2016), pp. 630–
645.

83. A. J. Doupe, D. J. Perkel, A. Reiner, and E. A. Stern. “Birdbrains could teach basal ganglia research a new song.”

In: Trends in Neurosciences 28.7 (2005), pp. 353–363.
S. W. Bottjer and F. Johnson. “Circuits, hormones, and learning: Vocal behavior in songbirds.” In: Journal of
Neurobiology 33.5 (1997), pp. 602–618.

85. D. A. Lewis and S. R. Sesack. “Dopamine systems in the primate brain.” In: Handbook of Chemical Neu-

82.

84.

roanatomy 13 (1997), pp. 263–375.

86. M. A. Farries and D. J. Perkel. “A Telencephalic Nucleus Essential for Song Learning Contains Neurons with
Physiological Characteristics of Both Striatum and Globus Pallidus.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 22.9 (2002),
pp. 3776–3787.

87. G. D. Carrillo and A. J. Doupe. “Is the Songbird Area X Striatal, Pallidal, or Both? An Anatomical Study.” In:

Journal of Comparative Neurology 473.3 (2004), pp. 415–437.

88. M. Luo and D. J. Perkel. “A GABAergic, strongly inhibitory projection to a thalamic nucleus in the zebra finch

song system.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 19.15 (1999), pp. 6700–6711.

89. A. Leblois, ´A. L. Bodor, A. L. Person, and D. J. Perkel. “Millisecond timescale disinhibition mediates fast infor-
mation transmission through an avian basal ganglia loop.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 29.49 (2009), pp. 15420–
15433.

90. K. D. MacDermot et al. “Identification of FOXP2 truncation as a novel cause of developmental speech and

91.

language deficits.” In: American Journal of Human Genetics 76.6 (2005), pp. 1074–1080.
S. Haesler, K. Wada, A. Nshdejan, E. E. Morrisey, T. Lints, E. D. Jarvis, and C. Scharff. “FoxP2 Expression in
Avian Vocal Learners and Non-Learners.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 24.13 (2004), pp. 3164–3175.

92. M. S. Brainard and A. J. Doupe. “What songbirds teach us about learning.” In: Nature 417 (2002), pp. 351–417.
R. H. Hahnloser and A. Kotowicz. “Auditory representations and memory in birdsong learning.” In: Current
93.
Opinion in Neurobiology 20.3 (2010), pp. 332–339.
R. H. Hahnloser, A. A. Kozhevnikov, and M. S. Fee. An ultra-sparse code underlies the generation of neural
sequences in a songbird. 2002.

94.

24

95. M. A. Long and M. S. Fee. “Using temperature to analyse temporal dynamics in the songbird motor pathway.”

In: Nature 456.7219 (2008), pp. 189–194.

96. M. F. Schmidt, J. Mclean, and F. Goller. “Breathing and vocal control: The respiratory system as both a driver
and a target of telencephalic vocal motor circuits in songbirds.” In: Experimental Physiology 97.4 (2012), pp. 455–
461.

97. M. S. Brainard and A. J. Doupe. “Translating Birdsong: Songbirds as a Model for Basic and Applied Medical

Research.” In: Annual Review of Neuroscience 36.1 (2013), pp. 489–517.

98. G. E. Vates and F. Nottebohm. “Feedback circuitry within a song-learning pathway.” In: Neurobiology 92.May

(1995), pp. 5139–5143.

99. M. Luo, L. Ding, and D. J. Perkel. “An avian basal ganglia pathway essential for vocal learning forms a closed

topographic loop.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 21.17 (2001), pp. 6836–6845.

102.

101.

100. C. Scharff and F. Nottebohm. “A comparative study of the behavioral deficits following lesions of various
parts of the zebra finch song system: Implications for vocal learning.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 11.9 (1991),
pp. 2896–2913.
S. W. Bottjer, E. A. Miesner, and A. P. Arnold. “Forebrain Lesions Disrupt Development But Not Maintenance
of Song in Passerine Birds.” In: Science 224.4651 (1984), pp. 901–903.
B. P. ¨Olveczky, A. S. Andalman, and M. S. Fee. “Vocal experimentation in the juvenile songbird requires a basal
ganglia circuit.” In: PLoS Biology 3.5 (2005), pp. 0902–0909.
T. L. Warren, E. C. Tumer, J. D. Charlesworth, and M. S. Brainard. “Mechanisms and time course of vocal
learning and consolidation in the adult songbird.” In: Journal of Neurophysiology 106.4 (2011), pp. 1806–1821.
104. A. Leblois, B. J. Wendel, and D. J. Perkel. “Striatal dopamine modulates basal ganglia output and regulates
social context-dependent behavioral variability through D1 receptors.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 30.16 (2010),
pp. 5730–5743.

103.

105. A. S. Andalman and M. S. Fee. “A basal ganglia-forebrain circuit in the songbird biases motor output to avoid
vocal errors.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106.30 (2009),
pp. 12518–12523.

106. V. Gadagkar and J. H. Goldberg. “Dopamine Neurons Encode Performance Error in Singing Birds.” In: Science

176.1 (2016), pp. 139–148.

107. W. Schultz, P. Dayan, and P. R. Montague. “A neural substrate of prediction and reward.” In: Science 275.5306

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

(1997), pp. 1593–1599.
E. Hisey, M. G. Kearney, and R. Mooney. “A common neural circuit mechanism for internally guided and
externally reinforced forms of motor learning.” In: Nature Neuroscience 21.4 (2018), pp. 589–597.
L. Xiao, G. Chattree, F. G. Oscos, M. Cao, M. J. Wanat, and T. F. Roberts. “A Basal Ganglia Circuit Sufficient to
Guide Birdsong Learning.” In: Neuron 98.1 (2018), 208–221.e5.
L. Ding and D. J. Perkel. “Long-Term Potentiation in an Avian Basal Ganglia Nucleus Essential for Vocal
Learning.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 24.2 (2004), pp. 488–494.
J. N. Reynolds and J. R. Wickens. “A state-dependent trigger for electrophysiological recording at predeter-
mined membrane potentials.” In: Journal of Neuroscience Methods 131.1-2 (2003), pp. 111–119.
S. H´elie, S. W. Ell, and F. G. Ashby. “Learning robust cortico-cortical associations with the basal ganglia: An
integrative review.” In: Cortex 64 (2015), pp. 123–135.

113. M. S. Fee and C. Scharff. “The songbird as a model for the generation and learning of complex sequential

behaviors.” In: ILAR Journal 51.4 (2010), pp. 362–377.

114. K. Wada et al. “A molecular neuroethological approach for identifying and characterizing a cascade of behav-
iorally regulated genes.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
103.41 (2006), pp. 15212–15217.

115. M. Konishi. “Birdsong: From Behavior to Neuron.” In: Annual Review of Neuroscience 8.1 (1985), pp. 125–170.
S. W. Bottjer, E. A. Miesner, and A. P. Arnold. “Changes in neuronal number, density and size account for
116.
increases in volume of song-control nuclei during song development in zebra finches.” In: Neuroscience Letters
67.3 (1986), pp. 263–268.

117. K. Herrmann and H.-J. .-J. Bischof. “Delayed development of song control nuclei in the zebra finch is related

to behavioral development.” In: Journal of Comparative Neurology 245.2 (1986), pp. 167–175.

118. K. W. Nordeen and E. J. Nordeen. “Projection neurons within a vocal motor pathway are born during song

learning in zebra finches.” In: Nature 334.6178 (1988), pp. 149–151.

119. K. Herrmann and A. P. Arnold. “The development of afferent projections to the robust archistriatal nucleus
in male zebra finches: A quantitative electron microscopic study.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 11.7 (1991),
pp. 2063–2074.
F. Johnson and S. W. Bottjer. “Growth and regression of thalamic efferents in the song-control system of male
zebra finches.” In: Journal of Comparative Neurology 326.3 (1992), pp. 442–450.
F. Sohrabji, E. J. Nordeen, and K. W. Nordeen. “Characterization of neurons born and incorporated into a vocal
control nucleus during avian song learning.” In: Brain Research 620.2 (1993), pp. 335–338.

120.

121.

25

122.

R. Mooney and M. Rao. “Waiting periods versus early innervation: The development of axonal connections in
the zebra finch song system.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 14.11 I (1994), pp. 6532–6543.

123. G. Teuchert-Noodt, K.-H. Breuker, and R. Dawirs. “Neuronal lysosome accumulation in degrading synapses of
sensory-motor and limbic subsystems in the duck Anas platyrhynchos: indication of rearrangements during
avian brain development?” In: Developmental neuroscience 13.3 (1991), pp. 151–163.

124. D. F. Sherry and S. A. MacDougall-Shackleton. “Seasonal change in the avian hippocampus.” In: Frontiers in

125.

126.

Neuroendocrinology 37 (Apr. 2015), pp. 158–167.
L. D. LaDage, T. C. Roth, and V. V. Pravosudov. “Hippocampal neurogenesis is associated with migratory
behaviour in adult but not juvenile sparrows (Zonotrichia leucophrys ssp.)” In: Proceedings of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences 278.1702 (2011), pp. 138–143.
E. A. Brenowitz. “Plasticity of the adult avian song control system.” In: Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences 1016 (2004), pp. 560–585.

127. M. M. Mariette and K. L. Buchanan. “Prenatal acoustic communication programs offspring for higher posthatch-

ing temperatures in a songbird.” In: Behavioral Ecology 353.6301 (2016), pp. 812–814.

128. N. Amin, A. Doupe, and F. E. Theunissen. “Development of selectivity for natural sounds in the songbird

auditory forebrain.” In: Journal of Neurophysiology 97.5 (2007), pp. 3517–3531.

129. A. N. Chen and C. D. Meliza. “Experience-and sex-dependent intrinsic plasticity in the zebra finch auditory

cortex during song memorization.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 40.10 (2020), pp. 2047–2055.

130. M. T. Ross, D. Flores, R. Bertram, F. Johnson, and R. L. Hyson. “Neuronal intrinsic physiology changes during

131.

development of a learned behavior.” In: eneuro 4.5 (2017).
S. S. Shank and D. Margoliash. “Sleep and sensorimotor integration during early vocal learning in a songbird.”
In: Nature 458.7234 (2009), pp. 73–77.

132. K. A. Tschida and R. Mooney. “Deafening drives cell-type-specific changes to dendritic spines in a sensorimo-

tor nucleus important to learned vocalizations.” In: Neuron 73.5 (2012), pp. 1028–1039.

133. A. Daou and D. Margoliash. “Intrinsic neuronal properties represent song and error in zebra finch vocal learn-

ing.” In: Nature communications 11.1 (2020), pp. 1–17.

134. A. Daou and D. Margoliash. “Intrinsic plasticity and birdsong learning.” In: Neurobiology of Learning and Mem-

135.

136.

ory 180 (2021), p. 107407.
I. R. Fiete, W. Senn, C. Z. Wang, and R. H. Hahnloser. “Spike-Time-Dependent Plasticity and Heterosynaptic
Competition Organize Networks to Produce Long Scale-Free Sequences of Neural Activity.” In: Neuron 65.4
(2010), pp. 563–576.
T. F. Roberts, K. A. Tschida, M. E. Klein, and R. Mooney. “Rapid spine stabilization and synaptic enhancement
at the onset of behavioural learning.” In: Physiology & behavior 176.1 (2016), pp. 139–148.

137. G. Cornez, E. Jonckers, S. M. ter Haar, A. V. der Linden, C. A. Cornil, and J. Balthazart. “Timing of perineuronal
net development in the zebra finch song control system correlates with developmental song learning.” In:
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 285.1883 (July 2018), p. 20180849.
S. Iyengar, S. S. Viswanathan, and S. W. Bottjer. “Development of topography within song control circuitry of
zebra finches during the sensitive period for song learning.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 19.14 (1999), pp. 6037–
6057.

138.

139. A. Alvarez-Buylla, M. Theelen, and F. Nottebohm. “Birth of projection neurons in the higher vocal center of the
canary forebrain before, during, and after song learning.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 85.22 (1988), pp. 8722–8726.
S. W. Bottjer, S. L. Glaessner, and A. P. Arnold. “Ontogeny of brain nuclei controlling song learning and
behavior in zebra finches.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 5.6 (1985), pp. 1556–1562.

140.

141. D. Aronov, A. S. Andalman, and M. S. Fee. “A specialized forebrain circuit for vocal babbling in the juvenile

songbird.” In: Science 320.5876 (2008), pp. 630–634.
J. Garst-Orozco, B. Babadi, and B. P. ¨Olveczky. “A neural circuit mechanism for regulating vocal variability
during song learning in zebra finches.” In: eLife 3 (2014), e03697.
L. F. Jacobs. “The economy of winter: Phenotypic plasticity in behavior and brain structure.” In: Biological
Bulletin 191.1 (1996), pp. 92–100.

144. G. F. Ball and J. Balthazart. “Seasonal and hormonal modulation of neurotransmitter systems in the song

control circuit.” In: Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39.2 (2010), pp. 82–95.
F. Nottebohm, M. E. Nottebohm, L. A. Crane, and J. C. Wingfield. “Seasonal changes in gonadal hormone levels
of adult male canaries and their relation to song.” In: Behavioral and Neural Biology 47.2 (1987), pp. 197–211.
B. A. Alward, J. Balthazart, and G. F. Ball. “Differential effects of global versus local testosterone on singing
behavior and its underlying neural substrate.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 110.48 (2013), pp. 19573–19578.
F. Nottebohm. “A Brain for All Seasons: Cyclical Anatomical Changes in Song Control Nuclei of the Canary
Brain.” In: Science 214.4527 (1981), pp. 1368–1370.
E. A. Brenowitz. “Comparative approaches to the avian song system.” In: Journal of Neurobiology · 4695.De-
cember 1997 (1997).

142.

143.

145.

146.

147.

148.

26

149.

F. Nottebohm, M. E. Nottebohm, and L. Crane. “Developmental and seasonal changes in canary song and
their relation to changes in the anatomy of song-control nuclei.” In: Behavioral and Neural Biology 46.3 (1986),
pp. 445–471.

150. M. L. Caras, M. O’Brien, E. A. Brenowitz, and E. W. Rubel. “Estradiol selectively enhances auditory function

in avian forebrain neurons.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 32.49 (2012), pp. 17597–17611.

151. G. De Groof, M. Verhoye, V. Van Meir, J. Balthazart, and A. Van Der Linden. “Seasonal rewiring of the songbird

brain: An in vivo MRI study.” In: European Journal of Neuroscience 28.12 (2008), pp. 2475–2485.

152. C. Del Negro and J. M. Edeline. “Sex and season influence the proportion of thin spike cells in the canary HVc.”

153.

In: NeuroReport 13.16 (2002), pp. 2005–2009.
J. Meitzen, D. J. Perkel, and E. A. Brenowitz. “Seasonal changes in intrinsic electrophysiological activity of
song control neurons in wild song sparrows.” In: Journal of Comparative Physiology A: Neuroethology, Sensory,
Neural, and Behavioral Physiology 193.6 (2007), pp. 677–683.

154. A. D. Tramontin and E. A. Brenowitz. “Seasonal plasticity in the adult brain.” In: Trends in Neurosciences 23.6

155.

(2000), pp. 251–258.
S. A. Goldman and F. Nottebohm. “Neuronal production, migration, and differentiation in a vocal control
nucleus of the adult female canary brain.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 80.8 I (1983), pp. 2390–2394.

156. A. Alvarez-Buylla and J. R. Kirn. “Birth, migration, incorporation, and death of vocal control neurons in adult

songbirds.” In: Journal of Neurobiology 33.5 (1997), pp. 585–601.

157. K. M. Hill and T. J. DeVoogd. “Altered daylength affects dendritic structure in a song-related brain region in

158.

159.

red-winged blackbirds.” In: Behavioral and Neural Biology 56.3 (1991), pp. 240–250.
J. A. Thompson and F. Johnson. “HVC Microlesions Do Not Destabilize the Vocal Patterns of Adult Male Zebra
Finches with Prior Ablation of LMAN.” In: Developmental Neurobiology 67: (2007), pp. 205–218.
S. Korsia and S. W. Bottjer. “Chronic testosterone treatment impairs vocal learning in male zebra finches
during a restricted period of development.” In: Journal of Neuroscience 11.8 (1991), pp. 2362–2371.

163.

161.
162.

160. C. S. Whaling, D. A. Nelson, and P. Marler. “Testosterone-induced shortening of the storage phase of song
development in birds interferes with vocal learning.” In: Developmental Psychobiology 28.7 (1995), pp. 367–
376.
S. R. y. Cajal. Degeneration & regeneration of the nervous system. Oxford University Press, 1928.
E. C. Tumer and M. S. Brainard. “Performance variability enables adaptive plasticity of ’crystallized’ adult
birdsong.” In: Nature 450.7173 (2007), pp. 1240–1244.
J. Alliende, N. Giret, L. Pidoux, C. Del Negro, and A. Leblois. “Seasonal plasticity of song behavior relies
on motor and syntactic variability induced by a basal ganglia–forebrain circuit.” In: Neuroscience 359 (2017),
pp. 49–68.
B. P. ¨Olveczky, T. M. Otchy, J. H. Goldberg, D. Aronov, and M. S. Fee. “Changes in the neural control of a
complex motor sequence during learning.” In: Journal of Neurophysiology 106.1 (July 2011), pp. 386–397.
R. Mooney and M. Konishi. “Two distinct inputs to an avian song nucleus activate different glutamate receptor
subtypes on individual neurons.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 88.10 (1991), pp. 4075–4079.

165.

164.

166. M. Butz and A. van Ooyen. “A simple rule for dendritic spine and axonal bouton formation can account for
cortical reorganization after focal retinal lesions.” In: PLoS computational biology 9.10 (2013), e1003259.
167. M. Butz, I. D. Steenbuck, and A. van Ooyen. “Homeostatic structural plasticity increases the efficiency of

small-world networks.” In: Frontiers in synaptic neuroscience 6 (2014), p. 7.

168. A. Knoblauch, E. K¨orner, U. K¨orner, and F. T. Sommer. “Structural synaptic plasticity has high memory ca-
pacity and can explain graded amnesia, catastrophic forgetting, and the spacing effect.” In: PloS one 9.5 (2014),
e96485.
P. Poirazi and B. W. Mel. “Impact of active dendrites and structural plasticity on the memory capacity of neural
tissue.” In: Neuron 29.3 (2001), pp. 779–796.

169.

170. A. Stepanyants, P. R. Hof, and D. B. Chklovskii. “Geometry and structural plasticity of synaptic connectivity.”

In: Neuron 34.2 (2002), pp. 275–288.

171. K. A. Sailor, M. T. Valley, M. T. Wiechert, H. Riecke, G. J. Sun, W. Adams, J. C. Dennis, S. Sharafi, G.-l. Ming,
H. Song, et al. “Persistent structural plasticity optimizes sensory information processing in the olfactory bulb.”
In: Neuron 91.2 (2016), pp. 384–396.
T. Lightheart, S. Grainger, and T.-F. Lu. “Spike-timing-dependent construction.” In: Neural computation 25.10
(2013), pp. 2611–2645.

172.

173. A. Knoblauch, G. Palm, and F. T. Sommer. “Memory capacities for synaptic and structural plasticity.” In: Neural

Computation 22.2 (2010), pp. 289–341.

174. A. Knoblauch. “Impact of structural plasticity on memory formation and decline.” In: The Rewiring Brain.

175.

Elsevier, 2017, pp. 361–386.
B. Fritzke. “A Growing Neural Gas Network Learns Topologies.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 7. Ed. by G. Tesauro, D. S. Touretzky, and T. K. Leen. MIT Press, 1995, pp. 625–632.

27

176.

177.
178.

T. Kohonen. “Self-organized formation of topologically correct feature maps.” In: Biological Cybernetics 43.1
(1982), pp. 59–69.
R. Reed. “Pruning algorithms-a survey.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 4.5 (1993), pp. 740–747.
Y. LeCun, J. S. Denker, and S. A. Solla. “Optimal Brain Damage.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 2. Ed. by D. S. Touretzky. Morgan-Kaufmann, 1990, pp. 598–605.

179. D. Blalock, J. J. G. Ortiz, J. Frankle, and J. Guttag. What is the State of Neural Network Pruning? 2020. arXiv:

180.

2003.03033 [cs.LG].
P. J. Angeline, G. M. Saunders, and J. B. Pollack. “An evolutionary algorithm that constructs recurrent neural
networks.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 5.1 (1994), pp. 54–65.

183.

182.

181. D. J. Willshaw and C. V. D. Malsburg. “A marker induction mechanism for the establishment of ordered neural
mappings: its application to the retinotectal problem.” In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. B, Biological Sciences 287.1021 (Nov. 1979), pp. 203–243.
T. Elliott and N. R. Shadbolt. “A Neurotrophic Model of the Development of the Retinogeniculocortical Path-
way Induced by Spontaneous Retinal Waves.” In: The Journal of Neuroscience 19.18 (Sept. 1999), pp. 7951–7970.
J. Sirosh and R. Miikkulainen. “Self-organization and functional role of lateral connections and multisize re-
ceptive fields in the primary visual cortex.” In: Neural Processing Letters 3.1 (Apr. 1996), pp. 39–48.
P. A. Bogdan, A. G. D. Rowley, O. Rhodes, and S. B. Furber. “Structural Plasticity on the SpiNNaker Many-Core
Neuromorphic System.” In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 12 (July 2018).
S. A. Bamford, A. F. Murray, and D. J. Willshaw. “Synaptic rewiring for topographic mapping and receptive
field development.” In: Neural Networks 23.4 (May 2010), pp. 517–527.

185.

184.

186. D. Kappel, R. Legenstein, S. Habenschuss, M. Hsieh, and W. Maass. “A Dynamic Connectome Supports the
Emergence of Stable Computational Function of Neural Circuits through Reward-Based Learning.” In: eneuro
5.2 (Mar. 2018), ENEURO.0301–17.2018.
F. G. Ashby, B. O. Turner, and J. C. Horvitz. “Cortical and basal ganglia contributions to habit learning and
automaticity.” In: Trends in cognitive sciences 14.5 (2010), pp. 208–215.

187.

188. A. Pasupathy and E. K. Miller. “Different time courses of learning-related activity in the prefrontal cortex and

striatum.” In: Nature 433.7028 (2005), pp. 873–876.
R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, et al. Introduction to reinforcement learning. Vol. 135. MIT press Cambridge, 1998.

189.
190. G. Goh. “Why Momentum Really Works.” In: Distill (2017).
191. N. Vieillard, B. Scherrer, O. Pietquin, and M. Geist. “Momentum in reinforcement learning.” In: International

Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR. 2020, pp. 2529–2538.
L. Ding and D. J. Perkel. “Long-term potentiation in an avian basal ganglia nucleus essential for vocal learning.”
In: Journal of Neuroscience 24.2 (2004), pp. 488–494.

193. W. H. Mehaffey and A. J. Doupe. “Naturalistic stimulation drives opposing heterosynaptic plasticity at two

inputs to songbird cortex.” In: Nature neuroscience 18.9 (2015), pp. 1272–1280.
T. Tes¸ileanu, B. ¨Olveczky, and V. Balasubramanian. “Rules and mechanisms for efficient two-stage learning in
neural circuits.” In: Elife 6 (2017), e20944.
R. Sankar, N. P. Rougier, and A. Leblois. rsankar9/Review-momentum-illustration. Version v1.0.0. Mar. 2021.
T. Boraud, A. Leblois, and N. P. Rougier. “A natural history of skills.” In: Progress in Neurobiology 171 (Dec.
2018), pp. 114–124.
L. Vasung, E. A. Turk, S. L. Ferradal, J. Sutin, J. N. Stout, B. Ahtam, P.-Y. Lin, and P. E. Grant. “Exploring early
human brain development with structural and physiological neuroimaging.” In: NeuroImage 187 (Feb. 2019),
pp. 226–254.

192.

194.

195.
196.

197.

198. D. Caligiore et al. “Consensus Paper: Towards a Systems-Level View of Cerebellar Function: the Interplay

Between Cerebellum, Basal Ganglia, and Cortex.” In: The Cerebellum 16.1 (Feb. 2016), pp. 203–229.

199. K. Doya. “Complementary roles of basal ganglia and cerebellum in learning and motor control.” In: Current

Opinion in Neurobiology 10.6 (Dec. 2000), pp. 732–739.

200. D. Marr. “Simple memory: a theory for archicortex.” In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of Lon-

201.

202.

don. B, Biological Sciences 262.841 (July 1971), pp. 23–81.
B. Bontempi, C. Laurent-Demir, C. Destrade, and R. Jaffard. “Time-dependent reorganization of brain circuitry
underlying long-term memory storage.” In: Nature 400.6745 (Aug. 1999), pp. 671–675.
T. Maviel. “Sites of Neocortical Reorganization Critical for Remote Spatial Memory.” In: Science 305.5680 (July
2004), pp. 96–99.

203. K. Teffer and K. Semendeferi. “Human prefrontal cortex: evolution, development, and pathology.” In: Progress

in brain research. Vol. 195. Elsevier, 2012, pp. 191–218.

28

