Glumpy Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier. Glumpy: Fast, scalable and beautiful scientific
visualization. EuroScipy, Aug 2015, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
￿hal-01217524￿

HAL Id: hal-01217524

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01217524

Submitted on 19 Oct 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

there’s more at glumpy.github.io

nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr

Realtime fluid simulation …

SPIRAL GALAXY SIMULATION USING DENSITY WAVE THEORY

…USING GPU

any number of isolines on the GPU

MANDATORY GPU FRACTAL

waow !!! it’s really super fast !

400 FPS on a macbook pro

3D plot using antialiased lines and text…

text is rendered using signed distant fields

any modification is …

interactive session using the regular python shell allows for dynamic
data exploration

… displayed immediately

did you know that a set of cones seen from above is a voronoi diagram ?

…with antigrain quality

320 REALTIME SIGNALS (1,000 points each)

HIGH-FREQUENCY SIGNAL USING GPU MULTISAMPLING

ANy kinD of projection can be computed directly on the GPU

CONic equal area (albers)

cylindrical

Glumpy is a python library for scientific visualization that is both
fast, scalable and beautiful. Glumpy offers an intuitive interface
between numpy and modern OpenGL.

Numpy arrays are tracked automatically such that any change on the CPU
is reflected automatically on the GPU, making the integration seamless.

glumpy provides more than 100 examples showing how to achieve this or
that visualization, such as antialiasing, text rendering, isolines
computation, image filtering, cartographic projection, realtime signals,
FLUID simulation, SVG rendering, etc.

Glumpy is a laboratory for experimenting ideas to be integrated into the
vispy project that lives at vispy.org, But glumpy can also be used as a
standalone library.

spherical harmonics on the GPU

import numpy as np from glumpy import app, collection

window = app.Window(1024,1024, color=(1,1,1,1)) @window.event def
on_draw(dt): window.clear() points.draw()

points = Collection.points()
points.append(np.random.normal(0.0,0.5,(1000000,3))) app.run()


