Creative Application of AI in Education
Alex Urmeneta, Margarida Romero

To cite this version:

Alex Urmeneta, Margarida Romero. Creative Application of AI in Education. Alex Urmeneta, Mar-
garida Romero. Creative Application of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Springer, pp.3 - 16, 2024,
￿10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_1￿. ￿hal-04593569￿

HAL Id: hal-04593569

https://hal.science/hal-04593569

Submitted on 29 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

1 

Creative Application of Artificial 
Intelligence in Education 

Alex Urmeneta and Margarida Romero 

Abstract The chapter commences by presenting the emergence of arti-
ﬁcial intelligence (AI) in the ﬁeld of education. It aims to provide an 
overview of the AI environment in education, highlighting the impor-
tance of a nuanced comprehension of its effects, ethical implications, and 
potential to stimulate innovative teaching methods. The chapter explores 
the historical background of technological interventions in education 
and takes a critical approach to examining the potential beneﬁts and 
drawbacks of AI. It also considers the sociocultural and creative aspects 
of using AI in education. AI has typically focused on imitating human 
intelligence. Within the realm of human abilities, we recognise various 
degrees of creative involvement in AI in education, which demonstrates 
its capacity to revolutionise learning experiences. At the most advanced

A. Urmeneta (B) · M. Romero 
Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France 
e-mail: alex.urmeneta@etu.univ-cotedazur.fr 

M. Romero 
e-mail: margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr; margarida.romero@unice.fr 

© The Author(s) 2024 
A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in 
Education, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_1 

3

4

A. Urmeneta and M. Romero

stages of creative involvement, we explore the possibilities for collabo-
ration between human intelligence and AI, suggesting a viewpoint of 
human–AI co-creativity. The chapter also outlines the book’s structure, 
which consists of three main sections: the creative engagement approach, 
real examples in K-12 education, and advances and prospects in higher 
education. The different chapters envision not only the acculturation 
and education of AI, but also the potential of human–AI collaboration 
to support learners in expressing their unique talents and developing 
expansive, AI-supported learning initiatives. 

Keywords Creativity · AI education · Artiﬁcial intelligence · Hybrid 
intelligence · Human–AI collaboration · K-12 education · AI ethics · 
Creative pedagogies 

Introduction 

The recent availability of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) applications has 
increased public interest and sparked curiosity about the potential of 
Large Language Models (LLMs) and other forms of generative AI. These 
models, enabled by parallel breakthroughs in data management, cloud 
computing, and artiﬁcial neural networks (Zhai et al., 2021), are viewed 
by some as the catalyst for the fourth industrial revolution (Bühler et al., 
2022). One might wonder what the scholars who ﬁrst used the term 
“Artiﬁcial Intelligence” in the late 1950s would think of its nearly 70-
year journey to our current understanding and deﬁnitions of AI. Their 
deﬁnition of AI as “the science and engineering of making intelligent 
machines” seems modest given where we are today—still seemingly at the 
dawn of AI’s potential. Perhaps this is why there has been much debate 
in recent years about what constitutes AI, as different stakeholders seek 
to assign meaning that aligns with their own needs and goals (Samoili 
et al., 2020). It is through this lens that educational stakeholders are 
now considering the role of AI in education as they seek to deﬁne its use 
cases, impact, and potential challenges going forward. 

Education, ever ripe for change in response to current educational 
and societal challenges, has been earmarked as one of the domains in

1 Creative Application of Artificial Intelligence …

5

which the beneﬁts of AI can be developed, but also an area that necessi-
tates adherence to rigorous ethical principles. It is crucial for technology 
to prioritise the protection of privacy and the well-being of students 
and their communities. The study of the potential of AI for education 
opens many different perspectives that need to be considered within the 
context of Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) and its evolution in 
recent decades. This stands to reason given the complex role technology 
has played over the years in creating expectations around its ability to 
support the teaching and learning process. From headphones to projec-
tors to calculators and personal computers, the internet, smart devices, 
and MOOCs, each iteration carried with it a level of optimism and 
promise that this would be the technological advancement that trans-
formed education for the better (Escueta et al., 2017, Higgins et al., 
2012, Zhai et al., 2021). Nevertheless, such optimism warrants scrutiny 
when viewed through the lens of techno-solutionism (Selwyn, 2022), a 
perspective that emphasises a critical examination of technology’s role 
and its limitations in solving complex societal issues such the Sustain-
able Development Goals (SDGs). While technological advancements 
have improved some processes and supported the creation of others, 
the techno-solutionism perspective (Elfert, 2023). Urges us to ques-
tion the effectiveness of these innovations and whether they genuinely 
address root challenges or merely present a valueless transformation of 
the teaching and learning process. This sociocritical perspective in TEL 
encourages a nuanced understanding of the relationship between tech-
nology and education, prompting us to assess not only the potential 
beneﬁts but also the unintended consequences and limitations associated 
with each wave of technological adoption (Collin & Brotcorne, 2019). 
In doing so, we can cultivate a more informed and balanced approach 
to leveraging technology for educational advancement. Yet, with use 
cases frequently driven by commercial interests or entities employing 
opaque development principles, many of these advancements have had, 
arguably, mixed results when it comes to transforming the learning expe-
rience or the prevailing pedagogy of the time. Certainly, the inclusion 
of personal computers, smart devices, and internet access in educational 
settings has felt important for a great number of students and educa-
tors, but to say that these technologies have radically altered how the

6

A. Urmeneta and M. Romero

learning experience remains 

majority of students learn may well be looked upon decades from now 
as recency bias (Zhai et al., 2021). Rather, it might be more accurate 
to say that technology has served as a catalyst of sorts pushing stake-
holders in the developed world to reconsider some teaching and learning 
processes, even while lacking the capacity required to fundamentally 
improve said processes. For example, while videoconference technolo-
gies have supported the rise of remote learning, the underlying teaching 
and 
largely uneven and, in some cases, 
has actually given rise to a host of new challenges requiring their own 
technological and pedagogical solutions. We see this in studies devel-
oped during the pandemic, where the issue of videoconference fatigue 
(Bennett et al., 2021) and technostress (Anh et al., 2023) were identiﬁed 
in both students and educators. Yet, even through this historical lens, the 
current levels of both promise and concern being afforded to AI and AI 
tools seems magnitudes greater than the introduction of earlier educa-
tion technologies. In fact, Seldon et al. (2020) views AI as the Fourth 
Education Revolution considering a context in which AI is recognised 
by different authors as a lever of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR). 
It is our hope that this book goes some way towards explaining how AI 
could serve as a powerful force for change within education, but more 
speciﬁcally, as a collaborative tool furthering the cause of human–AI 
creativity. 

From Human Intelligence Emulation 
to Human–AI Creativity 

in 

fact 
The current hype surrounding AI may seem sudden, but 
researchers have been building towards this moment since the 1950s. 
AI used to be the purview of researchers and science ﬁction authors 
living ﬁrmly in the realm of imagination. AI encompasses the emula-
tion of human intelligence by machines or computer systems. It involves 
the development of algorithms and computational models that enable 
machines to perform tasks typically associated with human cognition, 
learning, and decision-making (Ng et al., 
such as problem-solving, 
2023). AI systems leverage data and advanced algorithms to analyse

1 Creative Application of Artificial Intelligence …

7

including machine 

patterns, draw insights, and adapt their behaviour over time, aiming 
to replicate and augment human-like intelligence. This evolving ﬁeld 
encompasses various subﬁelds, 
learning, natural 
language processing, and computer vision, contributing to the contin-
uous reﬁnement and expansion of AI capabilities. The ubiquitousness 
of generative AI tools and their ease of use has signiﬁcantly altered 
the public perception around their usefulness. In recent years, a major 
disruption has emerged with the rise of generative AI and the avail-
ability of technologies such as Chat GPT, Midjourney, and AI chatbots 
and their relative ease of use. Today, AI can be found in any number 
of applications serving a diverse number of sectors and uses. From 
writing assistants to x-ray diagnostic tools to data processing, a signiﬁ-
cant percentage of the population has reportedly experimented with AI 
tools (Chui et al., 2023). Despite the current enthusiasm, there remains a 
considerable amount of work to be done around the risks associated with 
these tools. Questions of access, bias, data protection and privacy, use of 
copyrighted material in training models, and responsible use are growing 
louder as stakeholders struggle to keep pace with the rapid growth of AI 
use. 

The traditional deﬁnitions of AI encompass a simulation paradigm in 
which artiﬁcial systems aim to replicate human systems. However, this 
approach does not consider its potential not only as human-like intelli-
gence but as a cooperation tool for human–AI collaboration. Creativity is 
a complex human phenomenon that researchers try to replicate through 
artiﬁcial creativity systems. In education, considering creative pedagogy 
as a paradigm presents its own challenges given that there are no set 
methods explaining how to be creative; rather, strategies that facilitate the 
creative process (Pinillos & Vallverdú, 2021). This is supported by cogni-
tive research showing creativity not as a construct of some novel process 
within the brain, but rather a combination of executive functions, neuro-
chemical reactions and other mental processes (Beaty et al., 2018; Boccia 
et al., 2015). Given the lack of concrete instruction on how to be 
creative, how then should we consider the process of human creativity 
in relation to AI systems and associated concepts such as computational 
creativity?

8

A. Urmeneta and M. Romero

For the international group of researchers contributing to this book, 
the answer lies in viewing the efforts of both systems as co-contributors 
with the shared goal of facilitating creativity—both as a function of 
process as well as ideation. As AI systems have become more preva-
lent and accessible, the relationship between humans and AI has evolved 
beyond process automation to a more collaborative partnership based 
on shared synergies and strengths (Razmerita et al., 2022) and the 
metacognitive potential of human–AI collaboration (Romero et al., 
2023). It is at this intersection between human intuition and imagina-
tion and AI’s computation power and processing capabilities where we 
see the greatest potential for human–AI co-creativity. In fact, we can 
already see this potential today across a number of creative domains 
including music composition and performance (Rohrmeier, 2022) and 
in the visual arts where artists have 
leveraged AI tools to expand 
their creative process (Kim et al., 2021) through an extensive learning 
approach where AI serves transformational objectives (Romero et al., 
2023). For our purposes though, it is the potential for revisiting creativity 
through the lens of human–AI interactions, innovative teaching strate-
gies, and learner-centric activities that could support learners’ agency and 
a creative pedagogy supported by human–AI activities. 

For facilitating the identiﬁcation of the different levels of creative 
engagement in the use of AI, the Passive-Participatory (PP) model for 
AI in education (#PPai6) distinguishes six levels of creative engagement 
(Fig. 1.1). 

At the ﬁrst level, learners act as passive consumers, engaging with AI-
generated content without a full understanding of its workings. Moving

Fig. 1.1 Creative engagement in AI in education 

1 Creative Application of Artificial Intelligence …

9

through the levels, learners progress to become interactive consumers, 
actively interacting with AI-generated content as the AI system adapts to 
their actions. Levels three and four involve individual and collaborative 
content creation, respectively, with learners utilising AI tools to generate 
new content. The ﬁfth level, participatory knowledge co-creation, sees 
teams creating content with the aid of AI tools and collaboration from 
stakeholders to tackle complex problems. At the sixth and most advanced 
level, expansive learning supported by AI, participants’ agency expands 
or transforms problematic situations through formative interventions. AI 
tools play a crucial role in identifying contradictions in complex prob-
lems, generating concepts or artefacts to regulate conﬂicting stimuli, and 
fostering collective agency and action. While the potential for AI to reach 
this transformative level is immense, it is noteworthy that the majority 
of current AI in education studies operate at the second level (interac-
tive consumer), primarily relying on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS). 
The exploration of higher levels presents an exciting frontier for the 
future development and implementation of AI in education that will be 
explored through the different case studies of this book. 

AI in Education, a Critical Domain 
for the Society 

AI has emerged as a disruptive technology that holds the capacity to 
revolutionise certain educational endeavours, such as the composition 
of written essays or the facilitation of hybrid intelligence approaches 
(Järvelä et al., 2023; Molenaar, 2022). These hybrid systems, which 
intelligence, have the potential to 
amalgamate artiﬁcial and human 
enhance the pedagogical process by providing support for teaching and 
learning activities. AI, as a disruptive technology, possesses the capacity 
to revolutionise the process of knowledge creation for various educa-
tional stakeholders, including students, faculty members, and society as a 
whole. AI possesses the potential to not only be incorporated into hybrid 
systems designed to foster learners’ agency and creativity, but also to facil-
itate the personalisation of the learning process. Through the utilisation

10

A. Urmeneta and M. Romero

of sophisticated algorithms and extensive datasets, AI possesses the capa-
bility to facilitate the adaptability of digital educational environments, 
including educational serious games (Zhan et al., 2022). The primary 
objective of the individualised approach is to facilitate the active involve-
ment of learners and offer tailored feedback that is contingent upon the 
speciﬁc nature of the learning tasks at hand. Though the use of learning 
analytics, AI technologies have the capability to facilitate the automation 
of administrative tasks, as well as detect and analyse potential challenges 
encountered by learners in their digital educational journeys. 

Within the context of AI in education, much of the research has 
centred around institutional or strategic applications and AI in the 
practice of teaching and learning (Bates et al., 2020). Institutional appli-
cations primarily deal with data mining or AI’s ability to organise huge 
data sets into relevant outcomes. This is particularly useful for helping 
educational institutions identify and diagnose systemic and individual 
problems within the current education framework (Zhai et al., 2021). 
The second approach, and the primary focus of this book, is how AI can 
enhance the learning experience by redeﬁning current teaching strategies, 
expanding pathways for learning, and reducing or eliminating barriers 
to knowledge transfer. Speciﬁcally, the book explores the dynamic inter-
section of AI, education, and creativity, focusing on how human–AI 
learning activities can unleash creative pedagogies (Leroy & Romero, 
2021; Lin, 2011; Selkrig & Keamy, 2017). 

it 

Education 

is not merely about 

imparting knowledge; 

is about 
nurturing creative thinking, fostering critical skills, and empowering 
individuals to become lifelong learners. With the rapid advancement 
of AI, we are on the brink of a new era where intelligent technologies 
can enhance the learning experience in unprecedented ways, not only 
in relation to the personalisation of learning activities but to human– 
AI collaborations where AI supports the creative process of learners and 
teachers. In this context, we have the opportunity to redeﬁne the bound-
aries of creative pedagogies by integrating AI into pedagogical practices at 
different educational levels and domains, thereby creating new opportu-
nities for engaging, personalised, and transformative learning experiences 
through an expansive learning approach (Engeström & Sannino, 2021; 
Romero et al., 2023).

1 Creative Application of Artificial Intelligence …

11

Through this book we aim not only to address the current prac-
tices of AI in education but also to develop further the opportunities 
and potentialities of co-creativity in human–AI technologies. The next 
section will introduce the organisation of the book towards these two 
main objectives. 

The Organisation of the Book 

This book focuses on the concept of creative application of AI 
in 
education as its central theme to address the pedagogical strategies for 
integrating AI in different educational settings ranging from primary to 
higher education, but also in outreach and citizen AI literacy activities. 
As such, the book is structured in three parts (Fig. 1.2). 

1. The ﬁrst part begins to develop the creative engagement perspec-
tive for learning and teaching AI, while describing how to use AI in 
creative ways through an expansive learning approach. 

2. The second part of the book focuses on concrete examples of AI in K-
12 education, not only from a researcher and teacher’s perspective, but 
giving learners the possibility to deﬁne their own vision, perspective,

Fig. 1.2 Organisation of the chapters in three parts

12

A. Urmeneta and M. Romero

doubts and worries related to the introduction of AI in education. 
These perspectives are important given that these learners will have a 
signiﬁcant impact on our future society based on their relationships 
with these intelligent tools, established during their formative school 
years, and reﬁned through their professional careers.

3. The third part of the book is devoted to the advances and oppor-
tunities of AI in higher education, covering not only different ﬁelds 
(e.g. teacher education, professional education, business education) 
but also different types of AI-supported tools such as games, chatbots, 
and AI assisted assessment. 

Through these different activities, we propose concrete examples of 
how education could beneﬁt from empowering all educational stake-
holders in their AI 
literacy and their capacity to design human–AI 
learning activities that foster creativity, inspire critical thinking, and 
promote problem-solving by embracing AI as a tool for expansive 
learning. 

The book also investigates the application of AI in various educa-
tional settings. From intelligent tutoring systems to adaptive game-based 
learning platforms, and from large language models such as ChatGPT to 
adaptive computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL), we set out 
to analyse the various domains wherein AI can have a signiﬁcant impact 
on enhancing the learning experience. Additionally, we examine how AI 
technologies can be integrated into both formal and informal educa-
tion to empower educators, learners, and their communities, supporting 
co-creative human–AI activities and the development of transformative 
agency (Fig. 1.3).

The book “Creative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Educa-
tion” is both a roadmap and a catalyst for further exploration into 
human–AI co-creativity. It is a snapshot of our current position at the 
dawn of AI and educational synergies, but is also intended to encourage 
more multidisciplinary discussions around the beneﬁts and potential 
challenges learners and educators face as we integrate and evolve this 
new relationship as co-creators. Join us then on this exciting and trans-
formative journey as we investigate creative pedagogies and explore the 
let’s develop and cultivate
integration of AI in education. Together, 

1 Creative Application of Artificial Intelligence …

13

Fig. 1.3 AI application in educational settings

multiple perspectives on the impact of AI in education, harness its poten-
tial, and consider scenarios where human–AI collaboration can support 
learners seeking to creatively express their unique talents and develop 
expansive AI-supported learning initiatives. 

References 

Anh, L. T., Whelan, E., & Umair, A. (2023). 

‘You’re still on mute’. A 
study of video conferencing fatigue during the COVID-19 pandemic from 
a technostress perspective. Behaviour & Information Technology, 42(11), 
1758–1772. 

Beaty, R. E., Thakral, P. P., Madore, K. P., Benedek, M., & Schacter, D. L. 
(2018). Core network contributions to remembering the past, imagining 
the future, and thinking creatively. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 30 (12), 
1939–1951. 

Bennett, A. A., Campion, E. D., Keeler, K. R., & Keener, S. K. (2021). 
Videoconference fatigue? Exploring changes in fatigue after videoconference 
meetings during COVID-19. Journal of Applied Psychology, 106 (3), 330.

14

A. Urmeneta and M. Romero

Boccia, M., Piccardi, L., Palermo, L., Nori, R., & Palmiero, M. (2015). 
Where do bright ideas occur in our brain? Meta-analytic evidence from 
neuroimaging studies of domainspeciﬁc creativity. Frontiers in Psychology, 6 , 
155624. 

Bühler, M. M., Jelinek, T., & Nübel, K. (2022). Training and preparing 
revolution. Education 
fourth 

industrial 

the 

for 

tomorrow’s workforce 
Sciences, 12(11), 782. 

Chui, M., Yee, L., Hall, B., & Singla, A. (2023). The state of AI in 2023: 
Generative AI’s breakout year. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantu 
mblack/our-insights/the-state-of-ai-in-2023-generative-ais-breakout-year 
Collin, S., & Brotcorne, P. (2019). Capturing digital (in)equity in teaching and 
learning: A sociocritical approach. The International Journal of Information 
and Learning Technology, 36 (2), 169–180. 
Elfert, M. (2023). Humanism and democracy 

in comparative education. 

Comparative Education, 59 (3), 1–18. 

Engeström, Y., & Sannino, A. (2021). From mediated actions to heteroge-
nous coalitions: Four generations of activity-theoretical studies of work and 
learning. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 28(1), 4–23. 

Escueta, M., Quan, V., Nickow, A. J., & Oreopoulos, P. (2017). Education tech-
nology: An evidence-based review (Working Paper 23744). National Bureau 
of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23744 

Higgins, S., Xiao, Z., & Katsipataki, M. (2012). The impact of digital tech-
nology on learning: A summary for the Education Endowment Foundation. 
Full Report. Education Endowment Foundation. https://eric.ed.gov/?id= 
ED612174 

Järvelä, S., Nguyen, A., & Hadwin, A. (2023). Human and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence collaboration for socially shared regulation in learning. British Journal 
of Educational Technology, 54 (2), 1057–1076. 

Kim, S. L., Cheong, M., Srivastava, A., Yoo, Y., & Yun, S. (2021). Knowledge 
sharing and creative behavior: The interaction effects of knowledge sharing 
and regulatory focus on creative behavior. Human Performance, 34 (1), 49– 
66. 

Leroy, A., & Romero, M. (2021). Teachers’ creative behaviors in STEAM 
(Vol. 6, 

in Education 

In Frontiers 

robotics. 

Activities with modular 
p. 642147). 

Lin, Y. S. (2011). Fostering creativity through education–a conceptual frame-

work of creative pedagogy. Creative education, 2(03), 149.

1 Creative Application of Artificial Intelligence …

15

Molenaar, I. (2022). The concept of hybrid human-AI regulation: Exempli-
fying how to support young learners’ self-regulated learning. Computers and 
Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 3, 100070. 

Ng, D. T. K., Lee, M., Tan, R. J. Y., Hu, X., Downie, J. S., & Chu, S. K. W. 
(2023). A review of AI teaching and learning from 2000 to 2020. Education 
and Information Technologies, 28(7), 8445–8501. 

Pinillos, A. S., & Vallverdú, J. (2021). What the#®¥ §/= $@ is Creativity?. 

Debats. Revista de cultura, poder i societat, 135–147. 

Razmerita, L., Brun, A., & Nabeth, T. (2022). Collaboration in the machine 
age: Trustworthy human-AI collaboration. In Advances in Selected Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence Areas: World Outstanding Women in Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
(pp. 333–356). Cham: Springer International Publishing. 

Rohrmeier, M. (2022). On creativity, music’s AI completeness, and four chal-
lenges for artiﬁcial musical creativity. Trans. Int. Soc. Music. Inf. Retr., 5 (1), 
50–66. 

Romero, M., Heiser, L., Lepage, A., Gagnebien, A., Bonjour, A., Lagarrigue, 
A., ... & Borgne, Y. A. L. (2023). Teaching and learning in the age of artiﬁcial 
intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06956. 

Samoili, S., Cobo, M. L., Gomez, E., De Prato, G., Martinez-Plumed, 
F., & Delipetrev, B. (2020). AI watch. Deﬁning artiﬁcial 
intelligence. 
Towards an operational deﬁnition and taxonomy of artiﬁcial intelligence (No. 
JRC118163). Joint Research Centre. 

Seldon, A., Abidoye, O., & Metcalf, T. (2020). The fourth education revolution 
reconsidered: Will artiﬁcial intelligence enrich or diminish humanity?. Legend 
Press Ltd. 

Selkrig, M., & Keamy, K. (2017). Creative pedagogy: A case for teachers’ 
creative learning being at the centre. Teaching Education, 28(3), 317–332. 
Selwyn, N. (2022). Digital degrowth: Toward radically sustainable education 
technology. Learning, Media and Technology, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17439884.2022.2159978 

Zhai, X., Chu, X., Chai, C. S., Jong, M. S. Y., Istenic, A., Spector, M., Liu, 
J.-B., Yuan, J., & Li, Y. (2021). A review of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) in 
education from 2010 to 2020. Complexity, 2021, e8812542. https://doi.org/ 
10.1155/2021/8812542 

Zhan, Z., Tong, Y., Lan, X., & Zhong, B. (2022). A systematic literature 
review of game-based learning in artiﬁcial intelligence education. Interac-
tive Learning Environments, 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2022. 
2115077

16

A. Urmeneta and M. Romero

is 

licensed under 

Open Access This chapter 
the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and 
reproduction 
long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons license and indicate if changes were made. 

in any medium or format, as 

terms of 

the 

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons 
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.

