Structure of receptive fields in a computational model of
area 3b of primary sensory cortex
Georgios Is Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Georgios Is Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier. Structure of receptive fields in a computational model
of area 3b of primary sensory cortex. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 2014, 8, pp.26.
￿10.3389/fncom.2014.00076￿. ￿hal-01052817￿

HAL Id: hal-01052817

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01052817

Submitted on 28 Jul 2014

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Structure of Receptive Fields in a
Computational Model of Area 3b of Primary Sensory Cortex

Georgios Is. Detorakis1 and Nicolas P. Rougier2,3,4,\*

1

Laboratoire des signaux et syst`emes, Sup´elec, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Bordeaux, France
3LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux, Institut Polytechnique de Bordeaux,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, UMR 5800, Talence, France
4Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives, Universit´e de Bordeaux,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France
\*Corresponding author: Nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr

Abstract

In a previous work, we introduced a computational model of area 3b which is built upon the neural
ﬁeld theory and receives input from a simpliﬁed model of the index distal ﬁnger pad populated by a
random set of touch receptors (Merkell cells). This model has been shown to be able to self-organize
following the random stimulation of the ﬁnger pad model and to cope, to some extent, with cortical or
skin lesions. The main hypothesis of the model is that learning of skin representations occurs at the
thalamo-cortical level while cortico-cortical connections serve a stereotyped competition mechanism that
shapes the receptive ﬁelds. To further assess this hypothesis and the validity of the model, we repro-
duced in this article the exact experimental protocol of DiCarlo et al. that has been used to examine
the structure of receptive ﬁelds in area 3b of the primary somatosensory cortex. Using the same analysis
toolset, the model yields consistent results, having most of the receptive ﬁelds to contain a single region
of excitation and one to several regions of inhibition. We further proceeded our study using a dynamic
competition that deeply inﬂuences the formation of the receptive ﬁelds. We hypothesized this dynamic
competition to correspond to some form of somatosensory attention that may help to precisely shape
the receptive ﬁelds. To test this hypothesis, we designed a protocol where an arbitrary region of interest
is delineated on the index distal ﬁnger pad and we either (1) instructed explicitly the model to attend
to this region (simulating an attentional signal) (2) preferentially trained the model on this region or
(3) combined the two aforementioned protocols simultaneously. Results tend to conﬁrm that dynamic
competition leads to shrunken receptive ﬁelds and its joint interaction with intensive training promotes
a massive receptive ﬁelds migration and shrinkage.

Keywords: Receptive Field — Neural Field — Somatosensory Cortex — Area 3b — SI — Computa-
tional Model — Self-Organization

1

3

4
4
4
4
6
6
8
8
8
9

9
9
11
11
11

11

16

19
19
20
20
21
21
21
23

24
24
24
25
25
25

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

Contents

Introduction

Material & Methods

Model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Finger pad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dorsal pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Area 3b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gain modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Initial training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Drum Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
RoI Protocol

Protocols

Results

Characterization of the RFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Training the RoI
Modulating the RoI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Joint eﬀect of training and modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Discussion

References

Appendix A - Detailed description of the model

Tabular description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Algorithms
Training protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
RoI/modulation protocol
Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Simulation details

Appendix B - Data analysis

Classical receptive ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Non-classical Receptive ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Relative histogram of cRFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cortical representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spatial event plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

Introduction

In a previous work (Detorakis and Rougier (2012)), we proposed a computational model of the so-
matosensory cortex based on neural ﬁeld theory (Amari (1977); Bressloﬀ (2011)). This model allowed us
to investigate formation and maintenance of ordered topographic maps in the primary somatosensory cortex
during the critical period of development (postnatal), where representations are shaped, and the post-critical
period, where representations are maintained and possibly reorganized in face of cortical or sensory lesions
or dynamic changes of the environment. The main hypothesis of the model is that feed-forward thalamo-
cortical connections are an adequate site of plasticity while cortico-cortical connections drive a competitive
mechanism that is central in the learning process. The model relies functionally on the balance between
lateral excitation and inhibition, allowing to widen or sharpen the response of the model and plays a critical
role in the shaping of the receptive ﬁelds during development. This modulation of the balance may originate
from at least two distinct processes at two diﬀerent time scales. In the long-term, neurogenesis/neuronal
death and synaptogenesis/synaptic degeneration Edelman (1987) are ontogenetic factors that shape cortical
connectivity during development as explained in Bressler and Tognoli (2006). Synaptic density spikes
during the childhood followed by a decline during adolescence and adulthood Feinberg et al. (1990).

To further support this hypothesis, we ﬁrst reproduced in this article the experimental protocol of Di-
Carlo et al. (1998) that has been used to characterize the structure of receptive ﬁelds (RFs) in area 3b of
primary somatosensory cortex in three alert monkeys. This protocol is based on the passive stimulation of
the distal ﬁnger pad using a rotating drum. This allowed the authors to show that most RFs contain a single,
central region of excitation and one or more regions of inhibition. In this work, we adapted this protocol
to our model and validated our results using the same modiﬁed linear regression algorithm to characterize
excitatory and inhibitory components of each RF. This helped us to tune the model and we found very
consistent results using a stereotyped proﬁle for lateral connections, resulting from a ﬁxed balance between
the amount of excitation and inhibition.

We further processed our analysis by considering the dynamic modulation of the competition following
a top-down signal that is supposed to originate from higher order cortical areas and has been implemented
as a gain multiplication at the level of the lateral intra-cortical connections. In the short-term perspective,
such modulation allows the model to give a sharper and stronger response to any stimulus. In the long term
perspective, the repeated modulation of the response has a long-lasting inﬂuence onto the structure of the
RFs. We hypothesized such a modulation to represent a form of somatosensory attention (spatial atten-
tion) because such modulation has been already proposed in the visual dimension as a possible mechanism
for spatial attention, more speciﬁcally in area V4 Salinas et al. (1997); Salinas and Sejnowski (2001).
Indeed, attention has been mostly studied in the visual system and can be deﬁned as a mechanism that
enhances the processing of interesting (understood as behaviorally relevant) locations (spatial or featural)
while darkening the rest Posner (1980); Treisman (1988). The ﬁrst neural correlate of that phenomenon
has been discovered by Moran and Desimone (1985) in V4 where neurons respond preferentially for a
given feature in their receptive ﬁelds. Since then, attentional eﬀects have been found in each map of the
ventral stream but also in the dorsal stream (area MT encoding for stimulus movement, LIP representing
stimuli in a head-centered reference frame). Such attentional eﬀects have also been identiﬁed in other modal-
ities as well: auditory Fritz et al. (2007); Picton and Hillyard (1974), motor D.A. Norman (1980) and
somatosensory to a much lesser extent, Hsiao et al. (1993). In fact, even if the somatosensory system has
been extensively studied in monkeys and rats, the nature of attentional mechanisms and how they may aﬀect
neocortical maps of somatosensory cortices remain largely unknown.

Our main hypothesis is that the modulation of a response in area 3b may be one of the core mechanism,
even though the origin of the modulation signal is not detailed in this article. To test this hypothesis, we
developed a speciﬁc protocol where modulation occurs only if a presented stimulus is located within a region
of interest (RoI) that corresponds to the attended region and we compared results with a protocol where the
region of interest is speciﬁcally trained. Results tends to highlight a prominent role of the modulation into

3

118

the shrinkage of the RFs even if only the joint interaction of training and attention lead to maximal eﬀects.

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

Material & Methods

Model

Finger pad

We modeled a skin patch of the index distal ﬁnger pad where Merkel’s ending complex (MEC) density is
known to be the highest and to convey information about touch and pressure, Pare et al. (2002). These
receptors have been shown to have a sustained response to any mechanical deﬂection of the skin tissue. We
thus considered a set of 256 receptors uniformly spread over the skin patch. When a stimulus is applied at
a given position z of the skin patch, its mechanic property extends the pressure level to nearby locations
(Goodwin et al., 1995). More formally, the response si of any receptor i located at ri is given by the
following equation:

si(z) = exp(−

1
2

kz − rik)

(1)

It is apparent that when a stimulus is present and its distance from the corresponding receptor tends to
zero, the activity is the highest possible. On the contrary, when there is no stimulus present, the activity
is zero. This model assumes a very simple correlation between the distance of the receptor to the stimulus
center and its level of activity. We chose such a simple model because it eases the mathematical analysis of
the model and we are not interested in the full modeling of the ﬁnger pad. More accurate models can be
found in Srinivasan (1989) (waterbed model), Dandekar et al. (2003) (ﬁnite elements) and in Sripati
et al. (2006b) (continuum mechanics) but we do not think using these models would fundamentally change
the properties of our model (see ﬁgure 1 for a comparison of the waterbed and Gaussian surface deﬂection
models) since the set of 256 receptors encode a two-dimensional quantity that corresponds to the position
of the stimulus.

132

Dorsal pathway

The dorsal column-medial lemniscus (DCML) pathway is the major aﬀerent pathway for mechanosensory
information and mediate tactile discrimination as well as proprioception (Purves et al., 2001). There
exist several relays along this path (dorsal root ganglion, gracile and cuneate nuclei of caudal medulla and
ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus) that convey information from ﬁrst order neurons up to the
somatosensory cortex. We modeled this complex pathway as a direct transformation of the MEC activity
corresponding to the mean distance between receptors activity and the corresponding feed-forward weights.
Consequently, and considering a stimulus at position z on the skin patch, the input I(x, z, t) received by a
neuron x of SI is given by equation:

I(x, z, t) = 1 −

1
n

n

Xi=0

|si(z) − wi

f (x, t)|

(2)

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

where i designates a speciﬁc skin receptor and wi
f (x, t) is the feed-forward weight at time t linking receptor
i to neuron x. This equation implies that any SI neuron receives input from all the skin receptors. From
a neurophysiological point of view, such an assumption is valid to the extent that we considered only a
small skin patch on distal ﬁnger pad. The transformation itself can be considered as the complement of the
normalized distance between the set of receptors and the set of feed-forward weights. Such transformation is
maximal (I(x, z) = 1) for a given stimulus z if ∀i, si(z) = wi
f (x, t). This is true because equation (1) implies
that the maximum amplitude of a stimulus is equal to one and we assumed that the feed-forward weights,
wf , are bound between 0 and 1 and therefore the maximal value of I(x, z) = 1 and the minimum value can
be I(x, z) = 0.

4

A

Receptive Field
Surface

B

C

40 mm

D

)

m
m

(
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
d
e
c
a
f
r
u
S

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

Waterbed model

5 mm

1.0 mm

Gaussian model

E

)

m
m

(
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
d
e
c
a
f
r
u
S

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

0.01

0.1
1.0
Distance from the load (mm)

L/3

L=10

-2.0

0.01

0.1
1.0
Distance from the load (mm)

L/3

L=10

Figure 1: Skin model. The ﬁnger pad skin patch is approximately of size 25mm2, using a receptor density
of 10/mm2. It has been modeled as a planar surface and we considered 256 MEC’s that are arranged in a
regular grid over the whole surface with a position jitter of 5%. This results in a quasi-uniform distribution
consistent with actual distribution of MEC as reported in Pare et al. (2002). A. Schematic diagram of the
hand. B. Position and relative size of the skin patch. C. Magniﬁcation of the skin patch showing MECs
distribution. D. Waterbed surface deﬂection model from Srinivasan (1989). E. Gaussian surface deﬂection
model from Detorakis and Rougier (2012). Each model predicts smaller deﬂection as a function of the
distance from the load.

5

142

Area 3b

Area 3b of the somatosensory cortex has been modeled using neural ﬁeld theory (Amari, 1977; Taylor,
1999; Wilson and Cowan, 1973) which considers the cortex as a continuous surface Ω. Considering a
stimulus z, the dynamic of the ﬁeld is given by equation:

τ

∂u(x, t)
∂t

= −u(x, t)

+

ZΩ

wl(x, y)f (u(y, t))dy

+

I(x, z, t)

(3)

decay term
| {z }

lateral interaction
{z

|

}

feed-forward input
{z

|

}

where u(x, t) is the membrane potential at position x, τ is the membrane time constant, f is the ﬁring
rate function, wl is the lateral connections function and I(x, z, t) is the output from the DCLM pathway as
deﬁned in previous section. The dynamic of the ﬁeld is tightly linked to the lateral connections function wl
that deﬁnes the behavior of the ﬁeld (traveling waves, spiral waves, bump solutions, see Bressloﬀ (2011) for
extensive review). In Detorakis and Rougier (2012), we deﬁned wl as a diﬀerence of Gaussian functions
such as to obtain bump solutions. More precisely, we assume wl is both isotropic and homogeneous (i.e.
wl(x, y) = wl(|x − y|)) and deﬁned as

wl(x) = we(x) − wi(x) = Ke exp

−x2
2σ2

e (cid:17)

(cid:16)

− Ki exp

−x2
2σ2

i (cid:17)

(cid:16)

(4)

excitatory part
{z

|

}

inhibitory part
{z

}

|

where (Ke, σe) and (Ki, σi) are constants that describe the extent and the strength of short-range excitation
and long-range inhibition (σi ≫ σe).

Learning occurs at the thalamo-cortical level using an Oja-like learning rule (proportional to a pre-synaptic
measure multiplied by a post-synaptic quantity) which solves stability problems that is known to exist in
the standard Hebbian learning rule (see Oja (1982)). It reads:

∂wf (x, t)
∂t

= γ (s(z) − wf (x, t))

pre-synaptic term
{z

|

}

ZΩ

|

we(|x − y|)f (u(y, t))dy

(5)

post-synaptic term
{z

}

where γ is a constant learning rate. We showed in Detorakis and Rougier (2012) how this learning rule,
coupled with the neural ﬁeld, allow the model to self-organize and develop topological representations of the
skin patch. All the details are given in Detorakis and Rougier (2012) but brieﬂy, equation (3) allows
the model to exhibit a single bump of activity (for any input) and the learning rule (5) exploits this bump
solution to promote learning at position where the excitatory part of the lateral connections function is
maximal. It is to be noted that because of the pre-synaptic term and the boundedness of receptors values
(i.e. are bounded between 0 and 1), feed-forward weights are also bounded between 0 and 1.

Gain modulation

As explained earlier, the shape of the bump solution of the neural ﬁeld can be controlled via lateral con-
nections function wl. We have been using until now a stereotyped proﬁle deﬁned by the extent and the
strength of short-range excitation (Ke, σe) and long-range inhibition (Ki, σi). This proﬁle is used for the
whole duration of the initial training protocol and has a direct inﬂuence on the self-organization process. We
could have used instead a wider/weaker or thiner/stronger proﬁle as shown in ﬁgure 3 but more importantly,
we can also modify it online, provided a signal is sent to indicate which proﬁle is to be used for processing the
next stimulus. This is what we refer as the attentional signal, originating from higher cortical areas. More
i) and (K ′′
precisely, we can use two parameters sets , (K ′
i ), and use the ﬁrst set when no attentional
signal is present and the second one, when an attentional signal is present.

e , K ′′

e, K ′

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

6

Cortical Layer

wi(x)

we(x)

Neuron

wf

Stimulus

Input Layer

Receptor

Figure 2: Schematic of the full model. Area 3b has
been modeled using a neural ﬁeld with lateral short-
range excitation (we) and long-range inhibition (wi).
Each unit is fed with the information from all the 256
MEC receptors via feed-forward connections (wf ).

Figure 3: Gain modulation. The response of the model depends functionally on the balance between lateral
excitation (gain Ke) and inhibition (gain Ki), allowing to widen (panel A) or sharpen (panel C) the peak
of activity when a stimulus is presented. If we consider the trigger threshold to be the peak of nominal
response (panel B), the same stimulus can either trigger a sharp response or not trigger any response at
all, depending on the modulation. This modulation is considered in this work as a form of somatosensory
attention.

7

Figure 4: Protocol stimuli sets. A The training protocol set is made of 50000 stimuli distributed uniformly
over the whole skin patch. At any moment, only one stimulus is presented to the model. B The drum
protocol is based on a rotating drum made of 750 dots spread over the surface of the drum. The rotation
of the drum makes stimuli to enter on the left side and exit on the right side of the skin patch, leading to
temporal correlation between the diﬀerent trials. At any moment, one to several stimuli can simultaneously
stimulate the skin patch. C The RoI protocol, in the case of intensive training, is made of two sets of equal
size (12500) for a total of 25000 stimuli. One set is made of stimuli exclusively located in the center of the
skin patch and the other set is made of stimuli located outside this central region. This results in a higher
(twofold) stimulus density in the central region. At any moment, only one stimulus is presented to the model.

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

Protocols

Initial training

Since the model initially possesses random weights, it is ﬁrstly necessary to train it in order to develop
topological representations of the skin patch. We thus re-implemented the training protocol that has been
used in Detorakis and Rougier (2012) and the training set is made of 50000 stimuli with random positions
uniformly distributed over the whole skin patch. Each stimulus is presented once to the model and equations
(3) and (5) are evaluated simultaneously until stability is achieved, i.e. there is no noticeable diﬀerence
between u(t) and u(t + δt). The model is reset and another stimulus is picked up until there is no more
available stimuli. A signiﬁcant diﬀerence with the original model is the toric implementation of skin patch
and cortical model as well. This means that any part of a stimulus that lay outside the skin patch reappears
at the opposite side of the skin patch. The same holds true for the cortical sheet. This has been done to
avoid any boundary eﬀects that are known to exist in self-organization models. Once the training ends, the
model has developed a topological representation of the skin patch such that two neighbor neurons on area
3b represent two neighbor location on the skin patch.

Drum Protocol

The drum protocol is a direct adaptation of the protocol that has been used in DiCarlo et al. (1998).
Authors used a cylindrical drum covered with a plastic sheet (28 mm × 250 mm) that possesses raised dots
pattern (with a density of 10 dots per square centimeter for a total of 750 dots). The drum was mounted
on a rotating drum stimulator and the orientation and the angular velocity of the drum were adjusted to
produce proximal-to-distal stimulus movement at 40mm/sec across the skin surface. The drum completed
100 revolutions and the total time of simulation was 14 minutes and stepped a total distance of 20mm. We
adapted the drum protocol as a planar surface of size 250mm×30mm and moved the skin patch over the full
length (40mm/second) before jumping back to the start and shifting up the patch by 200 µm. The drum

8

186

187

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

206

207

208

209

210

211

212

213

214

215

216

217

218

219

220

221

222

223

224

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

surface is made of 750 uniformly distributed dots, achieving a mean density of 10 dots/cm2. Using a sample
time step of 5ms, the model has been fed with 120000 samples for a complete sweep of the drum surface.
Activity of all neurons are recorded at once without centering the drum onto each individual receptive ﬁeld.

RoI Protocol

We ﬁrst deﬁned an arbitrary region of interest (RoI) on the surface of skin patch whose size is one quarter of
the total skin patch surface (see ﬁgure 4 panel C, the shaded squared area in the middle of the skin patch).
For the intensive training session, we used a set of 25000 stimuli such that one out of two stimuli landed into
the RoI (1 in / 1 out ratio, (see ﬁgure 4)). This means that the RoI, was twice more stimulated compared
to the rest part of the skin patch. We presented each stimuli once to the model until no more stimuli were
available. Learning occurs for the whole duration of the protocol. For the attentional experiment, we used
25000 uniformly spread stimuli over the whole skin patch. We presented each stimulus once to the model
until no more stimuli were available. If a stimulus position was within the RoI, (i.e. the center of the stimulus,
which is the most active zone of a stimulus) we explicitly instructed the model to attend to this stimulus
by modifying the gain of the lateral connections (Ke and Ki) as explained in the gain modulation section.
Learning occurs for the whole duration of the protocol.

Results

Characterization of the RFs

We ﬁrst report results concerning the characterization of RF structures observed in area 3b following the
exact protocol of DiCarlo et al. (1998), that was used to investigate the two-dimensional structure of area
3b neuronal non-classical receptive ﬁelds (ncRFs) in three alert monkeys (non-classical receptive ﬁelds are
deﬁned in Appendix B). As explained earlier, this protocol has been slightly adapted to meet the constraints
of the proposed computational model architecture. Following the initial training protocol were cortical
representations have been shaped (see Detorakis and Rougier (2012)), we applied the drum protocol
for a total of 120000 samples (that can have multiple sites of skin patch stimulation because of the raised
dot patterns). From these data, we applied the exact same linear regression algorithm proposed and used
by DiCarlo et al. (1998) for the characterization of the excitatory and inhibitory components of each
ncRF. More precisely, for each matrix representing an non-classical receptive ﬁeld, we ﬁrst convolved it with
a Gaussian ﬁlter (µ = 0 and σ = 1.7) and applied a thresholding (10% of the absolute peak value) on
every value. If a value was below the threshold, it was set to zero. We let each pixel of the non-classical
receptive ﬁeld to have at least two of the four neighbors non-zero and of the same sign such that isolated
islands of positive or negative values were not allowed if they had a total area less than 0.7mm2. Each
time we computed a ncRF, we also computed the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) as well as the noise index,
in order to constraint them to low values (see appendix B). After this preprocessing stage, we measured
the respective size of excitatory (positive) and inhibitory (negative) areas. The minimum and maximum
values of excitatory ncRFs were 9.12mm2, 25.92mm2, respectively for a mean size of 14.142. The minimum
and maximum values of inhibitory ncRFs were 5.92mm2, 26.56mm2, respectively for a mean size of 14.42.
Figure 5 shows the bivariate plot of excitatory versus inhibitory area (similar results have been found by
DiCarlo et al. (1998)). Furthermore, a k-means classiﬁcation of the ncRFs was performed on the ncRFs in
order to compare the number of ncRFs classes from the model with the number of classes in DiCarlo et al.
(1998). The k-means classiﬁcation separated 16 diﬀerent classes accodring to the topology of the excitatory
and inhibitory areas (homogeneity = 0.39, completeness = 1.0, V-measure = 0.56). We found non-classical
receptive ﬁelds whose excitatory area was surrounded by the inhibitory one as well as non-classical receptive
ﬁelds whose excitatory area was facing the inhibitory area (see ﬁgure 5). It is to be noted that ﬁgure 5 shows
a remarkable similarity with physiological results of DiCarlo et al., where most of the ncRFs are centered
around a central point of 15mm2 (excitatory) / 15mm2 (inhibitory). The spread is larger in the case of
DiCarlo but this was expected since we used a toric stimulation.

9

Figure 5: Characterization of the ncRFs. From the experimental drum protocol of DiCarlo et al. (1998),
we recorded 120000 responses for each of the 1024 neurons of the model and we subsequently applied the same
analysis with DiCarlo et al. (1998) to obtain the respective ncRF. The scatter plot on the right displays
the balance between excitatory and inhibitory components of each ncRF. Excitatory area was measured
as the total positive area in the thresholded ncRF (positive ncRF regions with values ≥ 10% of the peak
absolute ncRF value, see Materials and Methods and Appendix B). Inhibitory area was measured as the total
negative-thresholded ncRF area (negative ncRF regions with absolute values ≤ 10% of the peak absolute
ncRF value). The left part of the ﬁgure illustrates the diversity of ncRFs and the letter corresponds to a
point in the scatter plot. The bottom row shows the distributions of the sizes of ncRFs. The y-axis indicate
the number of neurons (n=1024) and the x-axis, from left to right displays the excitatory area of ncRFs, the
inhibitory area, the total area (is the sum of the excitatory and inhibitory areas) and the ratio of excitatory
area to inhibitory one in logarithmic scale.

10

51030Excitatoryarea(mm2)51030Inhibitoryarea(mm2ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPn=1024110100Area(mm2)0100200NumberofneuronsExcitatoryArea110100Area(mm2)InhibitoryArea110100Area(mm2)Totalarea0.1110Excitatory/InhibitoryareaRatio232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

263

264

265

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

273

274

275

276

Training the RoI

During the speciﬁc training of the RoI, we considered a set of 25000 stimuli, half of them being located in
the RoI. We will later refer to this as the intensive protocol. At the end of the protocol, we measured the
location and the size of the classical receptive ﬁelds (cRF) or simply receptive ﬁelds (RF) (see appendix B
for details) and compared them to the control setup, that corresponds to the end of the nominal training
period (or the start of this protocol). Figure 6 (panel B) reveals a strong migration of most RF towards
the RoI with an overall ﬁnal density being higher in the center of the RoI. We also measured RFs size at
the end of the protocol and compared them with control. The control setup shows a normal distribution
of sizes around a central value (2.1mm2 , SD=0.42) while the intensive training setup leads to a signiﬁcant
reduction of the RFs (1.6mm2 , SD=0.48). Overall, there has been a signiﬁcant decrease in the mean size of
RFs (see ﬁgure 7, panel B’). Such results are consistent with Xerri et al. (1994) that shows that intensive
training over a skin area can cause the corresponding cortical territory expansion with a simultaneous shrink
of receptive ﬁelds of neurons of the somatosensory cortex.

Modulating the RoI

In order to make the model to attend to the RoI, we considered a set of 25000 stimuli, uniformly spread
over the whole skin patch and we instructed the model to attend to a stimulus if this was within the RoI,
i.e. using diﬀerent gains for the lateral connections. The major diﬀerence compared to the intensive training
experiment is the non-migration of the RFs towards the center of the RoI as shown in ﬁgure 6, panel C. The
distribution remains actually quasi-uniform and the RoI does not beneﬁt from signiﬁcant higher density.
However, the sizes of the RFs have shrunk by 33%, leading to a mean size of 1.4mm2 (SD=0.37). This
demonstrates that migration and shrinkage of RFs are actually two distinct processes that can be (partly)
separated.

Joint eﬀect of training and modulation

For studying the joint eﬀect of training and modulation, we mixed the two RoI protocols and considered
both a non-uniform set of 25000 stimuli, half of them being located in the RoI and we instructed the model
to attend to a stimulus if it was located in the RoI. The ﬁnal density of RFs shown in ﬁgure 6D reveals
a massive migration of the RFs towards the RoI with a simultaneous shrinkage in their sizes compared to
the control conditions (0.71mm2, SD=0.04). These results point out that the combined eﬀects of intensive
training and modulation actually sum up, leading to both a massive migration and a dramatic shrinkage of
RFs, down to half the nominal size.

Discussion

Using the model presented in Detorakis and Rougier (2012), we ﬁrst validated it using the protocol
and neurophysiological data from DiCarlo et al. (1998). We adapted the protocol to meet computational
constraints and relevant recorded data. Results clearly indicate that the model is able to capture the main
aspects of the original data recorded on three alert monkeys with most of ncRFs to contain a single region of
excitation and one or more regions of inhibition located on one, two, three, or all four sides of the excitatory
center. This is the ﬁrst, to the best of our knowledge, computational model of area 3b that is able to replicate
real neurophysiological data with such accuracy even though we used a very simple model for the distal ﬁnger
pad and the dorsal column-medial lemniscus, as well. This tends to conﬁrm that the thalamo-cortical feed-
forward connections are an adequate site of plasticity while cortico-cortical connections drive the competition
mechanism. Furthermore, even if the present study has been circumscribed to the spatial characteristics of
the receptive ﬁelds, (Sripati et al., 2006a) have shown spatio-temporal receptive ﬁelds (STRF) in area 3b
tend to have early excitatory region followed by in-ﬁeld (replacing) greater inhibition. Authors conclude
that such greater inhibition observed in cortical STRFs points to the existence of underlying intracortical
mechanisms that is very consistent with our own hypothesis. To go further in this direction, we would need

11

Figure 6: RF Migrations. A. The distribution of RFs over the skin patch is quasi-uniformly distributed for
the control. B. Intensive training onto the RoI makes RFs to migrate towards the RoI leading to a higher
density of RFs within the RoI. C. Explicitly attending the RoI modiﬁes only marginally the distribution
of RFs that tend to remain quasi-uniformly distributed over the whole skin patch. D. The joint eﬀect of
intensive training and attention leads to an even greater migration of RFs towards the RoI (compared to
intensive training only).

12

012345678910(mm)012345678910(mm)ControlA012345678910(mm)012345678910(mm)IntensiveB012345678910(mm)012345678910(mm)AttentionC012345678910(mm)012345678910(mm)Attention and intensiveDFigure 7: RF Shrinkage. A’. The relative histograms of RFs sizes after initial training (50000 samples)
follows a normal distribution. B’. After model training, speciﬁcally in the RoI (with a 1/1 ratio) using
25000 extra samples, the mean RF size has been reduced by 25% compared to the nominal mean size. C’.
By sharpening the model response when a stimulus is presented within the RoI (25000 samples), the mean
RF size has been reduced by 33% compared to the nominal mean size. D’. The joint eﬀect of training and
modulation (25000 samples) leads to a dramatic shift in relative size of RF, with a mean size being half of the
nominal mean size. A” D”. Receptive ﬁeld of a single cell recorded at the end of each of the aforementioned
experiments. The receptive ﬁeld size in the attentional/intensive condition (0.007 mm2) has shrunk to one
third of the control size (0.024 mm2).

13

-50%0+50%020406080A'Reference (REF)(Mean:-0.00%, STE: 1.3)# Cells-50%0+50%020406080B'Intensive Stimulation (IS)(Mean:-24.52%, STE: 1.3)# Cells-50%0+50%020406080C'Long Term Gain Modulation (LTGM)(Mean:-32.63%, STE: 1.1)# Cells-50%0+50%020406080D'LTGM + IS(Mean:-48.70%, STE: 1.1)# Cells0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)REFsize: 0.024 mm2A''010.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)ISsize: 0.011 mm2B''010.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)LTGMsize: 0.015 mm2C''010.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)LTGM + ISsize: 0.007 mm2D''01277

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

287

288

289

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

317

318

319

320

321

322

323

324

325

326

327

to consider ﬁnite transmission speed in cortico-cortical connections instead of instantenous connection Hutt
and Rougier (2010).

We have also shown how this competition mechanism can be explicitly modulated by the modiﬁcation of
the gain at both the excitatory and inhibitory lateral connection levels. Such instructed modulation leads
to receptive ﬁelds shrinkage in the region of interest while keeping intact the overall organization, with no
noticeable migration of RFs. We identiﬁed such modulation as a form of spatial attention that is believed
to be deployed selectively on this or that part of the body. Interestingly enough, these eﬀects are known to
occur in the visual system and a number of recent studies have identiﬁed such eﬀects in area MT (Anton-
Erxleben et al., 2009; Womelsdorf et al., 2008). More precisely, authors have shown how attention inside
the cRF shrinks it, whereas directing attention next to the cRF expands it. Authors uses in their modeling
work a bell shaped attentional signal while we have been using a constant attentional signal, modifying the
gain for the whole population at once.

However, in the literature, the evidence for the eﬀects of such spatial attention on SI are still contra-
dictory. Hsiao and Vega-Bermudez (2001) has shown that attention is engaged in the modiﬁcation of
RFs in both primary and secondary somatosensory cortices and Braun et al. (2002) have conﬁrmed such
engagement of attention in the primary somatosensory cortex using neuroimaging techniques. However,
Godde et al. (2000) claimed that attention is not critical in enhancing performance during a discrimination
task even though, consecutive training or pairing stimulation (leading to co-activation) can aﬀect the RFs.
In the case of intensive training of the RoI, our model tends to suggest a large expansion of the cortical
territory with a simultaneous shrinkage of the receptive ﬁelds as well as strong migration of their centers
towards the RoI. These ﬁndings are still contradictory with psychophysical and neurophysiological studies
such as Godde et al. (2000); Pilz et al. (2004); Recanzone et al. (1992), where authors noticed that
the cortical representations undergo an expansion but at the same time RFs undergo a similar expansion.
However, other neurophysiological and neuroimaging studies have shown that when cortical representations
expand, RFs sizes seem to decrease Elbert et al. (1995); Xerri et al. (1994). These latter results are
also consistent with early ﬁndings of Sur et al. (1980). They found, from neurophysiological recordings
and mappings that the magniﬁcation factor of cortical representations is related to the size of RFs. More
precisely, the magniﬁcation factor is proportional to the size of RFs (the smaller the RFs the larger the
cortical representation). Our ﬁndings tend to conﬁrm that cortical representations in the case of intensive
stimulation increase their relative size with a simultaneous RFs shrinkage. These ﬁndings indicate that
there are two distinct processes at work, namely modulation and training, that are believed to be present
simultaneously in most cases, while there may exist a few cases where only one process is active. This may
reconcile the aforementioned contradictory results. To conﬁrm these ﬁndings, it would thus be necessary to
setup new experiments where modulation and training needs to be carefully dissociated. This can be done,
for example, by precisely controlling the amount of training received by a subject and by distracting the
subject such as drifting attentional process away from the primary task.

Even if our model suggests a hypothesis on how somatosensory spatial attention may modify the pro-
cessing of stimulus and promote reshaping of RFs, nothing has been said so far about the exact nature,
the origin and the selectivity of such attentional signal. Sarter et al. (2005) have proposed a possible
circuitry involving the basal forebrain corticopetal cholinergic system since it has been observed in several
studies Donoghue and Carroll (1987); Jimenez-Capdeville et al. (1997) that the loss of cortical cholin-
ergic system directly impacts attentional functions. Furthermore, Juliano et al. (1991) have shown that
the cholinergic depletion prevents expansion of somatosensory topographic maps, suggesting that choliner-
gic neurotransmitters are critical in the structure of cortical representations. Similarly, Rasmusson and
Dykes (1988); Tremblay et al. (1990a,b) proposed that a cholinergic signal is responsible for the gain
modulation of neuronal populations and that the co-activation of basal forebrain and the somatosensory
cortex by cutaneous stimulation lead to enhanced cortical activity. Overall, such a signal may originate from
a complex network involving the insular cortex, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the posterior parietal
cortex, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, the posterior cingulate cortex and the anterior cingulate cortex

14

328

329

330

331

332

333

334

335

336

337

338

339

340

341

342

343

344

345

346

347

348

349

350

351

352

as proposed by Menon and Uddin (2010). The main point is that the insular cortex acts as a switch
between two diﬀerent prefrontal networks leading to an attentional eﬀect through saliency occurring in the
anterior insular cortex. We can thus speculate that such a cholinergic signal may aﬀect the gain of intra-
cortical lateral connections and the explicit signal that has been used during the attended RoI protocol may
originate from a frontal decision.

Finally, even though we hardly notice it in our everyday life, somatosensory attention plays a critical
role in our perception of the outer world. For example, the contact of clothes on the skin can be largely
unattended even though all body receptors are activated at once. This results from habituation and yet, it
is still possible to concentrate on a speciﬁc part of the body to actually experience the contact. Such spatial
selectivity is very similar to the concept of the spotlight of attention proposed by Posner (1980) in the
eighties for the visual perception. At that time, authors were hypothesizing for the existence of a dedicated
control mechanism even though this view was later challenged by the premotor theory of attention proposed
by Rizzolatti and Craighero (1988). This later theory postulates instead that there is no need for two
diﬀerent mechanisms (attention and action) and has received support from several electrophysiological and
brain imaging studies. However, how this theory can be adapted to somatosensory attention remains unclear.
Our model cannot answer the question on the selectivity since we only used a broad and constant modulation
of the model. This choice has been made because we consider a small part of SI cortex where exactly one
bump of activity can exist anytime. If we were to consider a larger part of SI, where for example several
digit representations would co-exist, we would need a selective attentional signal to be able to direct gain
modulations to the relevant population involved in the representation of the RoI. This is quite a complex
problem, since this would involve not only a sensory representation of several digits (sensory homunculus),
but also a motor representation (motor homunculus) and visual information as well. This is far beyond
the scope of the present work but we think this might allow for a better understanding of somatosensory
attention.

15

353

354

355

356

357

358

359

360

361

362

363

364

365

366

367

368

369

370

371

372

373

374

375

376

377

378

379

380

381

382

383

384

385

386

387

388

389

390

391

392

References

Amari, S. (1977), Dynamics of pattern formation in lateral-inhibition type neural ﬁelds, Biological cybernet-

ics, 27, 2, 77–87

Anton-Erxleben, K., Stephan, V., and Treue, S. (2009), Attention reshapes center-surround receptive ﬁeld

structure in macaque cortical area mt, Cerebral Cortex, 19, 10, 2466–2478

Braun, C., Haug, M., Wiech, K., Birbaumer, N., Elbert, T., Roberts, L., et al. (2002), Functional organization

of primary somatosensory cortex depends on the focus of attention, Neuroimage, 17, 3, 1451–1458

Bressler, S. L. and Tognoli, E. (2006), Operational principles of neurocognitive networks, International

Journal of Psychophysiology, 60, 139–148

Bressloﬀ, P. (2011), Spatiotemporal dynamics of continuum neural ﬁelds, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical

and Theoretical, 45, 3, 033001

D.A. Norman, T. S. (1980), Consciousness and self-regulation: advances in research and theory (Kluwer /

Plenum Publ), chapter Attention to action: Willed and automatic control of behavior, 1–18

Dandekar, K., Raju, B. I., and Srinivasan, M. A. (2003), 3-d ﬁnite-element models of human and monkey
ﬁngertips to investigate the mechanics of tactile sense, Journal of biomechanical engineering, 125, 5, 682–
691

Detorakis, G. and Rougier, N. (2012), A neural ﬁeld model of the somatosensory cortex: Formation, main-

tenance and reorganization of ordered topographic maps, PloS one, 7, 7, e40257

DiCarlo, J. J., Johnson, K. O., and Hsiao, S. S. (1998), Structure of receptive ﬁelds in area 3b of primary

somatosensory cortex in the alert monkey., Journal of neuroscience, 18, 7, 2626–2645

Donoghue, J. and Carroll, K. (1987), Cholinergic modulation of sensory responses in rat primary somatic

sensory cortex, Brain Research, 408, 367 – 371

Edelman, G. (1987), Neural Darwinism (Basic Books, New York)

Elbert, T., Pantev, C., Wienbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., Taub, E., et al. (1995), Increased cortical representa-

tion of the ﬁngers of the left hand in string players, Science, 270, 5234, 305–307

Feinberg, I., Thode, H. J., and Chugani, J., H.T. an March (1990), Gamma distribution model describes
maturational curves for delta wave amplitude, cortical metabolic rate and synaptic density, Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 142, 2, 149–161

Fritz, J., Elhilali, M., David, S., and Shamma, S. (2007), Does attention play a role in dynamic receptive

ﬁeld adaptation to changing acoustic salience in a1?, Hearing research, 229, 1-2, 186

Godde, B., Stauﬀenberg, B., Spengler, F., and Dinse, H. (2000), Tactile coactivation-induced changes in

spatial discrimination performance, The Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 4, 1597–1604

Goodwin, A., Browning, A., and Wheat, H. (1995), Representation of curved surfaces in responses of
mechanoreceptive aﬀerent ﬁbers innervating the monkeys ﬁngerpad, The Journal of Neuroscience, 15,
1, 798–810

Hsiao, S. and Vega-Bermudez, F. (2001), 8 attention in the somatosensory system, in R. Nelson, ed., The

somatosensory system: Deciphering the brain’s own body image (CRC)

Hsiao, S. S., O’shaughnessy, D., and Johnson, K. O. (1993), Eﬀects of selective attention on spatial form
processing in monkey primary and secondary somatosensory cortex, Journal of Neurophysiology, 70, 1,
444–447

16

393

394

395

396

397

398

399

400

401

402

403

404

405

406

407

408

409

410

411

412

413

414

415

416

417

418

419

420

421

422

423

424

425

426

427

428

429

430

431

432

Hutt, A. and Rougier, N. P. (2010), Activity spread and breathers induced by ﬁnite transmission speeds in

two-dimensional neural ﬁelds, Physical Review E, 82, 5, 055701

Jimenez-Capdeville, M., Dykes, R., and Myasnikov, A. (1997), Diﬀerential control of cortical activity by the
basal forebrain in rats: a role for both cholinergic and inhibitory inﬂuences, Journal of Computational
Neuroscience, 381, 53–67

Juliano, S., Ma, W., and Eslin, D. (1991), Cholinergic depletion prevents expansion of topographic maps in

somatosensory cortex, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 88, 3, 780–784

Menon, V. and Uddin, L. (2010), Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model of insula

function, Brain Structure and Function, 214, 5, 655–667

Moran, J. and Desimone, R. (1985), Selective attention gates visual processing in the extrastriate cortex,

Science, 229, 782–784

Nordlie, E., Gewaltig, M.-O., and Plesser, H. E. (2009), Towards reproducible descriptions of neuronal

network models, PLoS Comput Biol, 5, 8, e1000456, doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000456

Oja, E. (1982), Simpliﬁed neuron model as a principal component analyzer, Journal of mathematical biology,

15, 3, 267–273

Pare, M., Smith, A., and Rice, F. (2002), Distribution and terminal arborizations of cutaneous mechanore-
ceptors in the glabrous ﬁnger pads of the monkey, The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 445, 347–359

Phillips, J., Johnson, K., and Hsiao, S. (1988), Spatial pattern representation and transformation in monkey

somatosensory cortex, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 85, 4, 1317–1321

Picton, T. and Hillyard, S. (1974), Human auditory evoked potentials. ii: Eﬀects of attention, Electroen-

cephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 36, 191–200

Pilz, K., Veit, R., Braun, C., and Godde, B. (2004), Eﬀects of co-activation on cortical organization and

discrimination performance, Neuroreport, 15, 17, 2669

Posner, M. I. (1980), Orienting of attention, Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 3–25

Purves, D., Augustine, G. J., Fitzpatrick, D., Katz, L. C., LaMantia, A.-S., McNamara, J. O., et al. (2001),
The Major Aﬀerent Pathway for Mechanosensory Information: The Dorsal Column-Medial Lemniscus
System (Sinauer Associates), chapter The somatic sensory system, 199 – 202

Rasmusson, D. and Dykes, R. (1988), Long-term enhancement of evoked potentials in cat somatosensory
cortex produced by co-activation of the basal forebrain and cutaneous receptors, Experimental Brain
Research, 70, 2, 276–286

Recanzone, G., Merzenich, M., Jenkins, W., Grajski, K., and Dinse, H. (1992), Topographic reorganization
of the hand representation in cortical area 3b owl monkeys trained in a frequency-discrimination task,
Journal of Neurophysiology, 67, 5, 1031–1056

Rizzolatti, G. and Craighero, L. (1988), Advances in psychological science: Vol.2. Biological and cognitive
aspects (Sabourin, M. and Craik, F. and Robert, M.), chapter Spatial attention: Mechanisms and theories,
171 – 198

Salinas, E., Abbott, L., et al. (1997), Invariant visual responses from attentional gain ﬁelds, Journal of

Neurophysiology, 77, 6, 3267–3272

Salinas, E. and Sejnowski, T. J. (2001), Book review: Gain modulation in the central nervous system: Where

behavior, neurophysiology, and computation meet, The Neuroscientist, 7, 5, 430–440

17

433

434

435

436

437

438

439

440

441

442

443

444

445

446

447

448

449

450

451

452

453

454

455

456

457

458

459

460

461

Sarter, M., Hasselmo, M., Bruno, J., Givens, B., et al. (2005), Unraveling the attentional functions of cortical
cholinergic inputs: interactions between signal-driven and cognitive modulation of signal detection, Brain
Research Reviews, 48, 1, 98–111

Srinivasan, M. (1989), Surface deﬂection of primate ﬁngertip under line load, Journal of Biomechanics, 22,

4, 343–349

Sripati, A., Yoshioka, T., Denchev, P., S.S., H., and Johnson, K. (2006a), Spatiotemporal receptive ﬁelds of
peripheral aﬀerents and cortical area 3b and 1 neurons in the primate somatosensory system, The Journal
of Neuroscience, 26, 7, 2101–2114

Sripati, A. P., Bensmaia, S. J., and Johnson, K. O. (2006b), A continuum mechanical model of mechanore-

ceptive aﬀerent responses to indented spatial patterns, Journal of neurophysiology, 95, 6, 3852–3864

Sur, M., Merzenich, M., Kaas, J., et al. (1980), Magniﬁcation, receptive-ﬁeld area, and hypercolumn size in

areas 3b and 1 of somatosensory cortex in owl monkeys, J Neurophysiol, 44, 2, 295–311

Taylor, J. G. (1999), Neural bubble dynamics in two dimensions: foundations, Biological Cybernetics, 80,

5167–5174

Treisman, A. (1988), Features and objects: The bartlett memorial lecture, The Quarterly Journal of Exper-

imental Psychology, 40, 201–237

Tremblay, N., Warren, R., and Dykes, R. (1990a), Electrophysiological studies of acetylcholine and the role
of the basal forebrain in the somatosensory cortex of the cat. i. cortical neurons excited by glutamate,
Journal of neurophysiology, 64, 4, 1199–1211

Tremblay, N., Warren, R., and Dykes, R. (1990b), Electrophysiological studies of acetylcholine and the role
of the basal forebrain in the somatosensory cortex of the cat. ii. cortical neurons excited by somatic stimuli,
Journal of neurophysiology, 64, 4, 1212–1222

Wilson, H. R. and Cowan, J. D. (1973), A mathematical theory of the functional dynamics of cortical and

thalamic nervous tissue, Kybernetic, 13, 55–80

Womelsdorf, T., Anton-Erxleben, K., and Treue, S. (2008), Receptive ﬁeld shift and shrinkage in macaque
middle temporal area through attentional gain modulation, The Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 36, 8934–
8944

Xerri, C., Stern, J., and Merzenich, M. (1994), Alterations of the cortical representation of the rat ventrum

induced by nursing behavior, The Journal of neuroscience, 14, 3, 1710–1721

18

462

463

Appendix A - Detailed description of the model

Tabular description

A Model Summary
Populations
Topology
Connectivity
Neuron model
Channel model
Synapse model
Plasticity
Input
Measurements

Three: receptors, thalamus and cortex
Two-dimensional, toric
Feed forward: one-to-all, lateral: all-to-all (including self-connections)
Dynamic rate model
–
–
Oja-like learning rule
Touch pressure from skin receptors
Classical and non-classical receptive ﬁelds, topographic maps

Type

B Topology
Name
Receptors Two-dimensional toric regular grid with jitter (5%)
Thalamus None
Cortex

Two-dimensional toric regular grid

Elements

C Populations
Name
Receptors Mechanic input
Thalamus Thalamic neuron
Cortex

Cortical neuron

Size
256
256
32 × 32

D Connectivity
Name
–
Wf

Target

Source
Receptors Thalamus Excitatory, ﬁxed, one to one, non-plastic
Thalamus Cortex

Pattern

We

Wi

Cortex

Cortex

Cortex

Cortex

Excitatory, random uniform, one to all, plastic
Wf (x, t) = U (0, 1)
Excitatory, Gaussian, toric, all to all, non-plastic
We(|x − y)| = Ke exp
Inhibitory, Gaussian, toric, all to all, non-plastic
Wi(|x − y|) = Ki exp

−kx−yk
2σ2
e

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

2

2

−kx−yk
2σ2
i

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

19

E1 Neuron Model
Name
Type
Membrane potential

Thalamic
Rate model
I(x, z, t) = 1 − 1
k

k
i=0 |si(z) − wi

f (x, t)|

P

E2 Neuron Model
Name
Type
Membrane potential

Cortical
Dynamic rate model
1
τ

∂t = −U (x, t) + α

∂U (x,t)

Ω Wl(|x − y|)f (U (y, t))dy + αI(x, z, t)

R

F Plasticity
Name Description
1
Wf
γ

∂Wf (x,t)
∂t

= γ(s(z, t) − wf (x, t))

Ω We(|x − y|)f (u(y, t))dy

R

G Input
Type
Mechanic

Description
si(z) = exp(− 1

2 kz − rik)

H Measurements
Classical and extended receptive ﬁelds of all cortical neurons

Table 1: Tabular description of the model following the prescription of Nordlie et al. (2009)

464

465

466

467

468

Algorithms

Training protocol

The initial training protocol described by equations (1) to (5) can be described using the following algorithm.
The full description of the learning process is given in Materials and Methods section and in Detorakis and
Rougier (2012) as well.

Algorithm 1 Learning protocol
Require: Ke, Ki, σe, σi, γ, α, τ, dt, S, ε

Compute we, wi and wl according to equation (4)
for each stimulus z in S do
Reset the activity u(x, 0)
Compute receptors activity s(z) according to equation (1)
Compute input activity I(x, t) according to equation (2)
while |u(t) − u(t + dt)| < ε do

Update u(x, t) according to equation (3)
Update wf (x, t) according to equation (5)

end while

end for

20

469

470

471

472

473

474

475

476

477

478

479

480

481

482

483

484

485

486

487

488

489

RoI/modulation protocol

The RoI protocol with modulation requires a slightly diﬀerent alorithm since we, wi and wl depend on the
position of the stimulus.

i, K”e, K”i, σe, σi, γ, α, τ, dt, S, ε
i and w′
i and w′′

Algorithm 2 RoI/modulation protocol
e, K ′
Require: K ′
e, w′
Compute w′
Compute w′′
e , w′′
for each stimulus z in S do
Reset the activity u(x, 0)
Compute receptors activity s(z) according to equation (1)
Compute input activity I(x, t) according to equation (2)
if stimulus is inside the RoI then

l according to equation (4)
l according to equation (4)

we, wi, wl ← w′

e, w′

i, w′
l

else

we, wi, wl ← w′′

e , w′′

i , w′′
l

end if
while |u(t) − u(t + dt)| < ε do

Update u(x, t) according to equation (3)
Update wf (x, t) according to equation (5)

end while

end for

Convergence

In order to measure the convergence of the learning process, we measured:

1. the evolution over time of the root mean square error (RMSE) of the feed-forward weights

2. the evolution over time of the receptive ﬁelds during the development of the topographic map and

during the RoI protocol

RMSE has been measured using the following equation:

RMSE[wf ] =

1
M

M

Xi=0

( ˆwi

f − wi

f )2,

(6)

f dsignate the ﬁnal feed-forward weights and wi

where ˆwi
f the feed-forward weight at epoch i. Data is
recorded every 50 epochs and RMSE is computed at the end of the simulation since it requires the ﬁnal
weights. Figure 8 displays RMSE for initial training and clearly shows the rapid convergence of the model
on the ﬁnal set of weights.

Parameters

All the parameters of the model are given in table 2 below, where n is the number of neurons of the cortex
model, Ke is the excitatory gain, σe is the variance of the excitatory lateral connections, Ki is the inhibitory
gain, σi is the variance of inhibitory lateral connections, α is a free scaling parameter, τ is the synapses
temporal decay constant, and γ is the learning rate. For the RoI protocol, we use two sets of parameter, the
ﬁrst set (RoI out) is used whenever the center of a stimulus is not within the RoI while the second set (RoI
in) is used each time a the center of a stimulus is within the RoI. The parameters of the model have been
tuned manually and a more detailed description of the role of each parameter can be found in Detorakis
and Rougier (2012).

21

Figure 8: Root-mean-square-error over thalamo-cortical weights. Left. RMSE has been computed every
50 epochs during the initial training protocol and show a rapid convergence after 5000 epochs Right. RMSE
has been computed for all RoI protocols to ensure no divergence occurs during training.

P rotocol

n

Ke

σe Ki

σi

α

τ

γ

Training
Drum
RoI out
RoI in

32×32
32×32
32×32
32×32

3.72
3.72
8.02
3.72

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

2.40
2.40
6.10
2.40

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

0.03
–
0.03
0.03

Table 2: Model parameters

22

0100002000030000Epochs0.050.000.050.100.150.200.250.30Root mean square error (RMSE) during initial trainingEpoch 0Epoch 500Epoch 1000Epoch 5000Epoch 100000.000.01RMSE / Intensive training0.000.01RMSE / Modulation within RoI40000500006000070000Epochs0.000.01textRMSE / Intensive + Modulation490

491

492

493

494

495

Simulation details

Simulations were performed on a HP Z800 Workstation with 8Gb of memory. The source code of all
simulations is written in Python using Numpy and Scipy scientiﬁc libraries, and it can be found at http://
webpages.lss.supelec.fr/perso/georgios.detorakis/software/index.html. The training simulation
consumes ∼ 45MB of physical memory and requires ∼ 30 minutes of real time (measured with time Unix
command). In all simulations, we used parameters given in table 2.

23

496

497

Appendix B - Data analysis

Classical receptive ﬁelds

A classical receptive ﬁeld or a receptive ﬁeld is deﬁned as the locus of the skin on which a stimulus triggers
a neural response, and describes as well the impact of the stimulus to the ﬁring rate of a neuron. A cRF is
a two-dimensional surface, which slope indicates the impact of the stimulus and its location points to the
skin surface which is represented by the corresponding neuron. We computed the cRF of each neuron using
a grid of p × p regularly spaced stimuli over the normalized skin patch. For each stimulus and after the
model has converged, the activity of each neuron of the model has been recorded and aggregated into a p × p
matrix that was identiﬁed as the cRF of the neuron. cRFs have been further charaterized by determining
their center of mass and size. The center of mass C is computed according to the following equation:

C =

Visi

2

p

Xi=0
p

2

Vi

Xi=0

(7)

498

499

500

501

502

503

504

where si is the position of a stimulus (i in [1, p2]) and Vi is the related activity of the neuron (activity of the
neuron when stimulus si is presented). The cRF area is computed using a normalized sum of the elements
of the cRF that are grater than a threshold value (< 0.05). Using these two informations, we can build plots
of cRFs lying at their respective position on the skin patch with high precision. We can therefore qualify
the topographic organization of the cRF and, when relevant, we can deﬁne the migration as well as size
modiﬁcation. The density of cRF over the skin patch was evaluated using a Gaussian ﬁlter with standard
deviation of 0.5 in each dimension.

505

Non-classical Receptive ﬁelds

We deﬁne non-classical receptive ﬁelds as the weights b that minimize the error between the predicted ﬁring
rates of neurons and the observed ones. Such non-classical receptive ﬁelds reveal what is the optimal stimulus
and how stimulus aﬀect the ﬁring rates of neurons. We computed non-classical receptive ﬁelds (ncRFs as
opposed to cRFs) using the protocol and method (analogue to reverse correlation) deﬁned in DiCarlo et al.
(1998). Therefore, the predicted impulse rate rp of a neuron in response to the nth stimulus is deﬁned to be
the sum of the eﬀects of each skin subregion to the neuron (see drum protocol for more details). Hence,

rp = b0 +

p

Xi=1

bixi(n)

(8)

where n is the number of the stimuli, p is the number of the diﬀerent skin subregions, xi is the stimulus
relief, b0 is the background ﬁring rate and bi is the strength of the eﬀect of a dot (since the stimulus each
time is a random dot pattern). Rewriting equation (8) in vector form we have,

rp = Xb

506

507

508

509

510

511

where r is a n × 1 vector of the ﬁring rates, X is a n × p matrix with values of ones in the ﬁrst column
and the stimuli in the remaining columns. Finally b is a p × 1 vector, which contains the weights of the
eﬀect of a stimulus to the neuron. This term is actually the non-classical receptive ﬁeld of a neuron, since
its values indicate the way that a stimulus aﬀect the ﬁring rate properties of a neuron. In addition, b can
be used in order to investigate further the optimality of each stimulus, in terms of neural responses. Besides
the predicted ﬁring rates, we had also a vector of observed discharge rates for every neuron, ro.

24

In order to compute the vector b, which minimizes the mean-squared error between rp and ro, we solved

the linear normal equations XT Xb = XT ro by inverting the stimulus autocorrelation matrix,

b = (XT X)−1XT ro

(9)

512

513

514

515

516

517

518

519

520

521

522

523

524

525

526

527

528

529

530

531

532

533

534

535

536

537

538

539

540

541

542

543

544

545

546

547

548

549

This method allows to compute the non-classical receptive ﬁelds, b for all the neurons at one and indi-
cates skin area that contribute positively to the ﬁring rate (excitatory part) or negatively (inhibitory part).
Throughout of this work anytime we refer to the non-classical receptive ﬁelds we mean the optimal vectors
b. For more details about this method refer to DiCarlo et al. (1998).

Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and Noise Index (NI)

When we applied the threshold method described in the main text, we also measured the SNR and the
Noise Index. From signal processing deﬁnition, noise is deﬁned to be the residual of the subtraction between
an original signal s and the ﬁltered one ¯s (see main text for more details about ﬁltering and thresholding
method). In our case, the original signal is the receptive ﬁeld and the ﬁltered signal is the receptive ﬁeld after
S
the application of a Gaussian ﬁlter with zero mean and variance 1, 7. SNR is given by SNR=10 log10
,
N (cid:17)
where S is the power of the original signal s and N is the noise power. We measured the SNR for each RF
and we found that the mean SNR was 8 (S.D.=1.5).

(cid:16)

In addition, and in accordance with DiCarlo et al. (1998), we computed the Noise Index (NI) according
to equation N I = 100 Var[noise]
max{|s|} . N I is given in terms of the absolute peak of the original signal s. We
measured the Noise Index for each of the RF, ﬁnding a mean value of 1.5% (S.D.=0.01). Conclusively, both
measures SN R and Noise Index pinpoint that the noise was eliminated.

Relative histogram of cRFS

Histograms of receptive ﬁeld sizes have been made relatively to the control case in order to underline the
various changes. Considering the mean size M (over the 32 × 32 RFs) of the control and a set {Xi}n of
observations, histogram were built using a set {Yi}n such that Yi = 100(Xi − m)/m with a ﬁxed size bins of
width 8%. Any bin with negative abscissa indicated a shrinking in RF size while positive abscissa indicated
an expansion.

Cortical representation

Cortical representation is deﬁned as the area of the cortical surface that respond when a stimulus is present
within the RoI. Using the RoI protocol, we recorded the two-dimensional activation of the whole cortical
model if, and only if, the stimulus center was located within the RoI (roughly half of the 25,000 stimuli).
We summed these activations and normalized the result to get values in the [0,1] interval.

Spatial event plot

During the execution of the drum protocol, the alignment of the stimulus and the responses of a speciﬁc
neuron was done by applying the spatial event plot (SEP) method described in Phillips et al. (1988) and
used by DiCarlo et al. (1998). The latter used a variation of SEP method in order to achieve better
resolution. Since we deal with a computational model, the ﬁrst version of the method was used because
it is easier to achieve the alignment of the stimulus and the neural response. We isolated the receptive
ﬁeld of a speciﬁc neuron and applied the drum protocol (see main text for more details), recording all the
responses of that neuron. The stimulus and the responses of the neuron were recorded for later processing.
We processed the array of the responses by assigning a one to the element of array which contained an evoked
response and a zero otherwise. Because the events array is a one-dimensional, we had to transform it into
a two-dimensional one in order to ﬁt the drum (input space). Therefore, we started from the lower right

25

550

551

552

553

554

555

corner (where the ﬁrst stimulus was applied according to the drum protocol) and we continuously skimmed
the array. Every time the drum swept was completed, we moved the next line of the array above the current
one. At the end of this process, we obtained a spatial event plot, as it is depicted in ﬁgure 9B. In addition to
the SEP, we also convolved the stimuli (dot patterns) with the non-classical receptive ﬁeld of a neuron such
as to obtain a prediction of the responses of the neuron to each stimulus. This method leads to the results
shown in ﬁgure 9A for a speciﬁc neuron.

B

m
m

0.030

0.025

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.005

0.000

Observed response

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

mm

Figure 9: Observed and predicted responses. A. Neural impulse rates of the neuron (20, 16). In order to
obtain this plot, we convolved the ncRF of the neuron with the random dot stimulus pattern. B. Spatial
event plot of neuron (20, 16). Each dot represents the position where a stimulus triggers a response for the
neuron. The axis x and y represent the length and the width of the drum (drum protocol, see the main text)
in mm, respectively.

26

