ENAS: A new software for spike train analysis and simulation Bruno
Cessac, Pierre Kornprobst, S. Kraria, H. Nasser, Daniela Pamplona,

Geoffrey Portelli, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Bruno Cessac, Pierre Kornprobst, S. Kraria, H. Nasser, Daniela Pamplona,
et al.. ENAS: A new software for spike train analysis and simulation.
Bernstein conference, Sep 2016, Berlin, Germany. . ￿hal-01368757￿

HAL Id: hal-01368757

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01368757

Submitted on 19 Sep 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

ENAS

A new software for spike train analysis and simulation

As one gains more intuitions and results on the importance of concerted
activity in spike trains, models are developed to extract potential
canonical principles underlying spike coding. These methods shed a new
light on spike train dynamics. However, they require time and expertise
to be implemented eﬃciently, making them hard to use on a daily basis by
neuroscientists or modelers. To bridge this gap, we developed the
license free multiplatform software ENAS integrating tools for spike
trains analysis and simulation.

Standard analysis

Virtual Retina simulator

ENAS provides statistical analysis with Maximum Entropy-Gibbs
distributions taking into account both spatial and temporal correlations
as constraints, allowing to introduce causality and memory in
statistics.

includes

includes a virtual

ENAS retina feedback simulator that connections from the bipolar to the
OPL layer and lateral connections in the IPL. This simulator maps images
into spikes in a bio plausible way.

Spatio-temporal analysis

Receptive ﬁeld estimation

Other features: Crop and bin rasters, select neurons subsets according
to diﬀerent criteria, set MEA array conﬁguration, generate rasters from
given statistics

Multi- platform

Linux, MacOS, Windows

Fast

GUI

Free

Parallel computing

User-friendly

https://enas.inria.fr

B. Cessac1 - P. Kornprobst1 - S. Kraria1 - H. Nasser1 - D. Pamplona1 -
G. Portelli1 - T. Viéville2 1: Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, Biovision
team, France 2: Inria, Mnemosyne team, France

Contact: bruno.cessac@inria.fr

. ) 6 0 E 3 1 C t n a r g (

m a r g o r p

d u S - S O C E

e h t

y b d n a 7 4 8 0 0 6 # n o i s i v n e R t c e o r P

j

i

n o n U n a e p o r u E

e h t

I

, T Y C N O C - R N A S P O E K

,

7 4 7 7 2 2

r e b m u n

I

V R E N - C R E

, T D A A R N

I

I

I

, ) C T S D E (

e c i N

f o

i

y t i s r e v n U d n a

h c r a e s e R f o

i

y r t s i n m h c n e r F

e h t

y b

d e t r o p p u s

s a w k r o w s i h T


