An Attractor Model of the Temporal Dynamics of the Songbird’s Premotor
Nucleus Fjola Hyseni, Nicolas P. Rougier, Arthur Leblois

To cite this version:

Fjola Hyseni, Nicolas P. Rougier, Arthur Leblois. An Attractor Model of
the Temporal Dynamics of the Songbird’s Premotor Nucleus. CNS 2023 -
32nd Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting, Jun 2023, Leipzig,
Germany. . ￿hal-04444204￿

HAL Id: hal-04444204

https://hal.science/hal-04444204

Submitted on 7 Feb 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

An Attractor Model of the Temporal Dynamics of the Songbird’s Premotor
Nucleus

FJOLA HYSENI

NICOLAS ROUGIER

ARTHUR LEBLOIS

INSTITUTE OF NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES

BORDEAUX UNIVERSITÉ - CNRS - INRIA

fjola.hyseni@u-bordeaux.fr

Introduction

1

Modelling motor timing in sonbirds: Synﬁre Chain vs. Ring Attractor.

Temporal control is crucial for coordinated movements during
sensorimotor tasks.

the generation of

What do songbirds te! us about timing? In male zebra finches, the
premotor nucleus HVC (proper name) is responsible for the precise
control of song tempo, becoming as such an ideal model for action
timing.

Song circuitry

Time- locked neuronal activity

How to model motor timing in HVC, in accordance with -
electrophysiological (3-6 spikes, 6 -10 ms burst) and - behavioral
(specificity in adaptive learning) evidence? Current computational
models of HVC rely on synfire chains. We propose attractor models as an
alternative.

2 Reproducing HVCRA dynamics

2.9 mV

3.8 mV

90 layers of 15 neurons

0.37 mV

0.41 mV

90 x 150

1.  We implement a synfire chain with adaptive leaky integrate and fire
    neurons with synaptic delays and show that the weights between
    layers can be modified only within a narrow range, the width of
    which decreases as we increase the number of neurons per layer.

A.  
B.  
C.  
D.  

2.  An alternative hypothesis is that the gradual propagation of an
    activity bump is driven in HVC by attractor dynamics. In particular,
    a linear attractor, also referred to as ring attractor, can drive a
    drifting activity bump with robust and resilient properties thanks
    to recurrent connections.

2

W(x − x′ ) = W0 + W2

−

(

e

1 σ 2π

x − x′

-   β 2σ )

Rate Based Model:

Exponential Integrate & Fire neuron with adaptation (AdEx) and
conduction delays:

τ

d dt

m(x, t) = − m(x, t) + G[Iext(x, t) + Isyn(x, t) − T + τnσnη(x, t)] *

C

dV dt

= − gL(V − EL) + gLΔTexp(

V − VT ΔT

) + Iext − w + Isyn + τnσηi(t) * *

Mean Firing Rate across Time, m(x, t)

Mean Firing Rate across Time, m(x, t)

* m(x, t) : membrane time constant, τ threshold,

: mean firing rate of neuron at time ,
    external input, Iext
    zero mean Gaussian white noise.

t G Isyn

x

τnσnη(x, t)

    semi-linear gain function,

    synaptic input,

    

T

Hahnloser et al., Nature 2002

-   Using the rate based model, only a a short duration bump profile can
    be generated, but a small membrane time constant (1 ms) is necessary
    to reproduce the 10 ms burst durations. With the spiking (SNN)
    model, we acquire results similar to the ones observed in the rate
    model, but are able to generate experimentally-observed neuronal
    dynamics with bioplausible parameters.

: membrane potential, C: membrane capacitance,

V

** leak reversal potential,

w

    adaptation variable,

VT

gL
    threshold,
    
    leak conductance, EL
    slope factor.

ΔT

3 Behavioral Adaptation with Reinforcement Learning

4

Discussion and Conclusion

Relying on a reward covariance rule (Williams, 1992), we show that the
duration of a syllable can be modified in response to a perturbed reward
profile, as implemented in a widely used lab conditioning paradigm.

Synfire Chain (not robust) Ring Attractor (robust)

A.  
B.  
C.  
D.  

Song timing: HVC (HVCRA neurons)

ΔW

ΔWij = γReijdt

eij =

t

∫

0

dt′ τe

e−(t−t′ )/τeηi(t′ )rj(t′ )

AdEx with delays; 3- 6 spikes, 6- 10 ms duration (~ HVCRA neurons)

Specific Adaptive Learning (~ behavioral experiments)

White noise

Syllable 1

Target Syllable

Syllable 3

Consistent with behavioral data, the change in duration is specific to
the target syllable. We see no interference with adjacent or
non-adjacent syllables, both in the case of targeting for duration
increase and decrease.

References

* 0.0001

SNN

[1] Jin et al., J Comput Neurosci, 2007: Intrinsic bursting enhances the
robustness of a neural network model of sequence generation by avian
brain area HVC. [2] Hansel & Sompolinsky, 1998: Modeling feature
selectivity in local cortical circuits. [3] Egger et al., Cell, 2020:
spatiotemporal properties of neural sequences. [4] Pehlevan et al., Nat.
Comm., 2018: Flexibility in motor timing constrains the topology and
dynamics of pattern generator circuits. [5] Buonomano & Laje, 2010:
Population clocks: motor timing with neural dynamics. [6] Williams,
Mach. Learn., 1992: Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning.

Local axonal conduction shapes the


