The relational and informational organisation in the
orbital and medial prefrontal cortex A study using
virtual experimentation
Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Frédéric Alexandre. The relational and informational organisation in the orbital
and medial prefrontal cortex A study using virtual experimentation. NeuroFrance, the international
conference of the french society of Neuroscience, May 2019, Marseille, France. 2019. ￿hal-02388181￿

HAL Id: hal-02388181

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02388181

Submitted on 1 Dec 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

The relational and informational organisation in the orbital and medial 

prefrontal cortex 
A study using virtual experimentation 

Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Frederic Alexandre 

bhargav.teja-nallapu@inria.fr 

INRIA, Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases, LaBRI Bordeaux

Prediction learning
Value of Stimuli (Primary/Learned goals and sub-goals)

Model-free Model-based Reinforcement learning

Autonomous learning

Decision Making
Value of Actions (motor decision, options, planning)

Interoception
•
• Motivational and 

emotional evaluation

• Exteroception
• Sensorimotor relations

Behavior and Cognition:
A matter of loops …

• Model-free (MF): long to learn, compact
• Model-based (MB): use forward models, more ﬂexible but heavy to 

compute

• With forward models, goal-driven strategies more tractable than 

• MF controls the behavior
• MB trains MF by replays (retrospective memory) and 

simulations (prospective memory)

Role of the limbic loops : Foraging or decision between several targets ? 

lOFC: learns values of stimuli (pavlov); menu dependent; sensory representation of rewards, consummatory behavior, Model Based; select the best two options
mOFC: reward representation for preparatory behavior (operant, Model Free), integrate levels of need; value difference signal; decide for the goal
ACC: integrate cost of effort to decide for the action; inverse value difference signal; if strong signal of conﬂict, ask for a switch

Main circuits for value prediction, decision making and planning

limbic and motor loops interactions

We deﬁne our goals by ourselves : 
• detection of primary reinforcers
• learning of secondary reinforcers
• attentional processes

We have a motivation to act : 
• Fundamental needs
• intrinsic motivation
• goal-driven behavior

and…
 - We self-evaluate our performances
 - We associate different kinds of learning and information representation
 - We cumulate and re-exploit previously learnt knowledge and strategies in different context 

Deﬁning executive control for a cognitive agent in ecological conditions
by autonomous learning

• Role of the loops between the frontal cortex and the basal ganglia for predicting values, 

decision making and planning

• The limbic loops decide for the goal and the action
• The associative loops bias the default behavior
• The motor loops execute the behavior
• Forward models associated with limbic and associative loops

References

[Alexander et al., 1986] Alexander, G., DeLong, M., and 
Strick, P. (1986). Parallel organization of functionally 
segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Ann. 
Rev. Neurosci., 9:357–381. 
[Johnson et al., 2016] Johnson, M., Hofmann, K., Hutton, 
T., and Bignell, D. (2016). The malmo platform for artiﬁcial 
intelligence experimentation 
[Krack et al., 2010] "Deep brain stimulation: from neurology 
to psychiatry?." Trends in neurosciences 33.10 (2010): 
474-484. 
[Rushworth MFS, et al.. 2012] Valuation and decision-
making in frontal cortex: one or many serial or parallel 
systems?, Curr Opin Neurobiol (2012) 

