Coordination over a unique medium of exchange under information scarcity
Aurélien Nioche, Basile Garcia, Germain Lefebvre, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas

P. Rougier, Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde

To cite this version:

Aurélien Nioche, Basile Garcia, Germain Lefebvre, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas
P. Rougier, et al.. Co- ordination over a unique medium of exchange
under information scarcity. Palgrave Communications, 2019.
￿hal-02356248￿

HAL Id: hal-02356248

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02356248

Submitted on 8 Nov 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

Nioche et al. 2019

Coordination over a unique medium of exchange under information scarcity

Aur´elien Nioche,1,2,3,4,5,†,∗ Basile Garcia,6,7,4,5,† Germain
Lefebvre,6 Thomas Boraud,4,5,8 Nicolas P. Rougier,7,4,5,9,‡ and Sacha
Bourgeois-Gironde10,2,3,‡ 1Aalto University, School of Electrical
Engineering, Department of Communications and Networking, 02150 Espoo,
Finland; 2Institut Jean Nicod, D´epartement d’Etudes Cognitives, ENS,
EHESS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France; 3Institut Jean
Nicod, CNRS, UMR 8129; 4Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives,
Universit´e de Bordeaux, 33000 Bordeaux, France; 5Institut des Maladies
Neurod´eg´en´eratives, CNRS, UMR 5293; 6Laboratoire de Neurosciences
Cognitives Computationnelles, D´epartement d’Etudes Cognitives, ENS, PSL
Research University, 75005 Paris, France; 7Laboratoire de Neurosciences
Cognitives Computationnelles, INSERM, U960; 8Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest,
33405 Talence, France; 9Centre Expert Parkinson, CHU Bordeaux, 33000
Bordeaux, France; 10LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux, INP, CNRS, UMR 5800,
33405 Talence, France; 11Laboratoire d’Economie Math´ematique et de
Micro´economie Appliqu´ee, Universit´e Panth´eon Assas, 75006 Paris,
France. †These authors have contributed equally to this work. ‡These
authors have also contributed equally to this work.

∗Corresponding author: nioche.aurelien@gmail.com

Several micro-founded macroeconomic models with rational expectations
address Abstract. the issue of money emergence, by characterizing it as
a coordination game. These models have in common the use of agents who
dispose of perfect or near-perfect information on the global state of
the economy and who display full-fledged computational abilities.
Several experimental studies have shown that a simple trial-and-error
learning process could constitute an explanation for how agents
coordinate on a single mean of exchange (Brown, 1996; Duffy, 2001;
Kindler et al., 2017; Lefebvre et al., 2018). However, these studies
provide subjects with full information regard- ing the state of the
economy while restricting the number of goods in circulation to three.
In this study, by the mean of multi-agent simulations and human
experiments, we test the hypothesis according to which coordination over
a unique medium of exchange is possible in the context of information
scarcity. In our experimental design, subjects and artificial agents are
only aware of the outcome of their own decisions. We provide results for
economies with 3 and 4 goods to evaluate to which extent it is possible
to generalize results obtained with 3 goods to n goods. Our findings
show that in an economy `a la Iwai (1996), commodity money can emerge
under drastic information restrictions with 3 goods in circulation, but
generalization to 4 or more goods is not guaranteed.

November 6, 2019

1

Nioche et al. 2019

Introduction

In the last decades, monetary economics has shifted from a purely
macroeconomic understand- ing of money to an analysis of its
micro-foundations, both in its game-theoretical and behavioral
dimensions. Following the intuitions of Karl Menger (1892) and starting
with the Jones’ model in the mid-1970’s (Jones, 1976), several
search-theoretic models have been proposed in order to identify the
conditions for money emergence (Diamond, 1984; Kiyotaki and Wright,
1991, 1989; Oh, 1989; Aiyagari and Wallace, 1991; Kiyotaki and Wright,
1993; Shi, 1995; Iwai, 1996; Kehoe et al., 1993; Wright, 1995; Luo,
1998). They are considered search-theoretic models in the sense that
they describe situations where agents need to search for a trading
partner before transact- ing (Nosal and Rocheteau, 2011). Besides, these
models belong to the class of micro-founded macroeconomic models with
rational expectations. Agents with rational expectations can take
advantage of all the available information to form their expectations
and decide which action is optimal on the belief that every other agent
in the economy has a similar ability (Muth, 1961).

Their first advantage is that they explain a macroeconomic
phenomenon—money emergence— from individual decision-making processes.
The second advantage of these models is that they explain money
emergence that does not require the economies to be centralized: they do
not need to assume a monetary authority for the agents to coordinate
over a unique medium of exchange. Focusing on the function of a medium
of exchange, these models highlight the key role that the money can play
in limiting frictions in exchange processes (i.e. the difficulty to find
an exchange partner). However, these models are based on three
unrealistic assumptions: the omniscience of economic agents, infinite
time and an extremely large number of agents (unbounded).

A question that immediately arises is whether money emergence without a
monetary authority is possible in an economy populated by agents with
restricted abilities and having limited access to information. More
precisely, we want to know whether coordination over a unique medium of
exchange is possible when agents proceed by trial and error and have
access to local information only.

A partial answer has been brought to this question, through agent-based
simulations with artifi- cial agents using a reinforcement learning
process (Marimon et al., 1990; Duffy and Ochs, 1999; Kindler et al.,
2017) in a Kiyotaki-and-Wright’s environment (Kiyotaki and Wright, 1989,
1993). In these simulations, reinforcement learning agents have by
construction limited computational abilities, and their informational
inputs are only constituted by the success and failures of each exchange
attempt. In contrast to Kiyotaki-and-Wright’s theoretical agents, they
are completely blind to the global state of the economy, and the tuning
of their preferences does not rely on the knowledge of the latter. Yet,
results report achievement of monetary equilibria, indicating that fully
rational agents are not required for money to emerge. In a similar
perspective, other work considers the question of money emergence under
heterogeneous beliefs, where some agents are rational, and the remaining
fraction learns by an adaptive learning rule, showing that coordina-
tion is also eventually possible in this setting (Branch and McGough,
2016).

The Kiyotaki’s and Wright’s model (Kiyotaki and Wright, 1989, 1993) has
been experimentally tested, to show if results obtained analytically or
by numerical simulation were reproducible with actual human subjects. It
had been shown that a monetary equilibrium can be reached with human
subjects evolving in a search-theoretic environment (Brown, 1996; Duffy
and Ochs, 1999;

November 6, 2019

2

Nioche et al. 2019

Duffy, 2001), or at least reaching a high proportion of speculators
(Lefebvre et al., 2018). Inter- estingly, it has been shown that a
reinforcement model fits well their experimental data obtained in a
Kiyotaki-and-Wright’s environment (Kiyotaki and Wright, 1989, 1993),
suggesting that al- though more sophisticated behavior rules were
available, subjects tended to favor immediate past feedback (Duffy and
Ochs, 1999; Duffy, 2001).

One first critic that we can address the computational and experimental
aforementioned stud- ies, is that although they succeeded in
demonstrating achievements of monetary equilibrium, they were mainly
considering the fundamental equilibrium of Kiyotaki and Wright (Kiyotaki
and Wright, 1989, 1993). Indeed, Kiyotaki and Wright (Kiyotaki and
Wright, 1989, 1993) consider two types of equilibrium: (i) fundamental,
where the monetized good is less costly to store than the other goods in
circulation, what explains easily why it is preferred, (ii) speculative,
where some agents are required to incur at first supplementary costs
(i.e. to speculate). The specula- tive equilibrium is particularly
interesting, as it provides insight about a specific cognitive ability
that could sustain money emergence (i.e. the ability to endorse a cost
on short term with view on distant goals), and yet, it is the one for
which the results are the scarcest (Brown, 1996; Duffy and Ochs, 1999;
Duffy, 2001; Kindler et al., 2017; Lefebvre et al., 2018). Secondly, in
contrast with virtual agents learning by reinforcement that are only
provided with scarce information, human subjects had access to
information about the global state of the economy in studies mixing the
use of artificial agents and human subjects (Duffy and Ochs, 1999;
Duffy, 2001; Lefebvre et al., 2018). Thirdly, to our knowledge, these
computational and experimental studies are based on search-theoretic
models involving only three goods (Brown, 1996; Duffy and Ochs, 1999;
Duffy, 2001; Kindler et al., 2017; Lefebvre et al., 2018). In this case,
only one type of agent uses the mon- etary good genuinely as a medium of
exchange. It remains to know whether their conclusions can hold if there
are more than three goods in circulation.

Let us note that in recent literature, numerous questions have been
treated through an experi- mental money-emergence paradigm: Whether a
convergence on a money equilibria is preferred to a gift exchange
equilibria, where an agent has the possibility to give a good in the
hope of obtaining another later (Duffy and Puzzello, 2014), how
inflation tax affects economic activity (Anbarci et al., 2015), how a
foreign money may be accepted by agents in an international frame- work
(Jiang and Zhang, 2018; Ding et al., 2018), how a monetary equilibrium
is reachable under assumption of a finite horizon (Davis et al., 2019),
or even how when a first money already circu- lates in the economy, a
second may emerge (Rietz, 2019). However, either they assume a central
authority that injects money (Anbarci et al., 2015; Ding et al., 2018),
either money does not emerge endogenously, as a fraction of agents is
first provided with tokens (worthless goods that none agents consume)
they are compelled to exchange to obtain their consumption good (Duffy
and Puzzello, 2014; Jiang and Zhang, 2018; Davis et al., 2019; Rietz,
2019). In these experiments, the cognitive requirements for money
emergence as an endogenous process are thus never explicitly tested.

The purpose of this study is to know whether economies populated with
human subjects can reach a monetary state in the context of information
scarcity, that is in a case of extremely in- complete information in the
sense of the game theory, forcing the subjects to take their decisions
under a strong form of ambiguity. More precisely, this study aims to
investigate whether coordi- nation over a unique medium of exchange can
occur with subjects only experiencing the direct outcome of their
decision, learning by trial-and-error and without any additional
information.

November 6, 2019

3

Nioche et al. 2019

Hence, the question is to know whether results obtained with virtual
agents combining a re- striction on computational abilities and
informational input can be generalized to economies populated with
humans. To assess their reliability and to broaden our conclusions, we
decided to include an additional good, including in our study economies
with four goods in circulation. To meet these goals, we borrowed certain
elements from the previous search-theoretical mod- els to define the
structure of our economies, such as the production-consumption
specialization and the absence of double coincidence of wants (i.e. if
an agent produces i and consumes j, no agent produces j and consumes i,
so that pure bartering is not an effective solution). However, instead
of using an environment a la Kiyotaki and Wright (Kiyotaki and Wright,
1989, 1993), we decided to use a search-theoretical structure that
presents more generality than Kiyotaki and Wright’s one, based on the
Iwai’s model (Iwai, 1996). Iwai’s model differs in two fundamental ways
from Kiyotaki and Wright’s model (Kiyotaki and Wright, 1989, 1993): (i)
the exchange tech- nology consists in random pairing inside markets
specialized in a pair of good while in Kiyotaki and Wright (1989, 1993),
agents are randomly matched regardless of any other characteristic (ii)
there are no storage cost, such as storing a good i is not costlier than
storing good j. That is why we decided to adopt an Iwai-like environment
with indistinguishable goods, in a way to avoid that money emergence
bears on intrinsic features of goods, as it is in the case of the
Kiyotaki and Wright’s fundamental equilibrium. We began by conducting a
series of simulations. In the simulated economies, agents are producing
a certain good and looking to obtain another one through exchanges, have
little knowledge about the environment in which they operate—they only
know if their attempt of exchange was a success or a failure. They are
learning using a basic reinforcement mechanism, associating a value to
each choice option available to them and updating by trial-and-error the
efficiency of each type of exchange. We used the results of these
simulations to identify the experimental conditions that would promote
the coordination over a single medium of exchange. Subsequently, we
observed the behaviors of human subjects un- der similar informational
constraints and we compare the theoretical and experimental results. To
conclude, we discuss the possibility of coordination over a unique
medium exchange in the context of information scarcity, in a three and
four goods setting.

Materials & Methods

Model

General framework Each economy is composed of different types of agents.
A type of agent is defined by what agents of this type produce and
consume. The goal of each agent is to obtain his consumption good.
Agents proceed to exchanges between them to achieve this goal. Agents
have feedback only about their exchange attempt and learn by
reinforcement the efficiency of each type of exchange. We vary across
simulations the distribution of agents among the existing types. By
construction, if a good m becomes money, an agent that produces it or
consumes it should try to exchange directly his production good against
his consumption good. Otherwise, the agent is supposed to use it as a
medium of exchange, that is to exchange his production good against m,
and then m against his consumption good.

November 6, 2019

4

Nioche et al. 2019

Production-consumption specialization. We consider an economy with G
goods in circu- lation, with G (cid:62) 3. We denote these goods 1, 2, .
. . , G. Each agent is specialized in production and consumption. A
agent of type (i, j) produces good i and consumes good j (with j
(cid:54)= i). We suppose a non double coincidence of needs: if an agent
of type (i, j) exists, then an agent of type (j, i) does not exist. We
use a minimally connected endowment-need distribution (Iwai, 1996), such
that existing agent types are: (G, 1), (1, 2), . . . , (G − 1, G). The
number of agents for each type is exogenously set. We designate by xG1
the number of agent of type (G, 1), x12 the number of agent of type (1,
2), … , xG−1 G the number of agent of type (G − 1, G). Each agent enters
the economy equipped with a unit of its production good. Each time an
agent receives its consumption good, it consumes it and immediately
after, produces a new unit of its production good (each agent owns a
single storage unit).

Exchange technology. The exchange technology relies on a trading-post
mechanism (Iwai, 1996). At each time step, each agent chooses the type
of exchange it wants to perform, depend- ing on the good it has in hand.
This choice determines to which market it goes. There is an equal number
of markets and goods in circulation. Each market is specialized in a
pair of good (i, j), such as in the ij-market it is possible to exchange
i against j, and j against i. Our trading technol- ogy works
synchronously (i.e., all exchanges occur simultaneously). Thus, in each
ij-market, we randomly associates each i-seller – j-buyer to a j-seller
– i-buyer, if there is a sufficient number of j-sellers – i-buyers.
Therefore, in each ij-market, the probability of successfully exchanging
a good i against a good j depends on the respective number of i-sellers
– j-buyers and j-sellers – i-buyers (e.g., if there is in the ij-market
at time t, 4 i-sellers – j-buyers and 8 j-sellers – i buyers, 4
ij-exchanges will take place and the probability of success for a
i-seller – j buyers is 0.5 while a j-seller – i-buyer will proceed to
the desired exchange with certainty).

Information scarcity. An agent does not know other agents’ choices, nor
the probabilities of success of each exchange: the only information it
has access to is whether or not it succeeded in the desired exchange.

Strategies. The goal of each agent is to obtain as quickly as possible
his consumption good.

We will specifically consider:

• The direct exchange strategy. For a type-ij agent with i in hand (his
production good), it

consists of trying an exchange against j (his consumption good).

• The indirect exchange strategy with k as a medium of exchange. For a
type-ij agent with i in hand (his production good), it consists of
trying an exchange against the good k (with k (cid:54)= i, j). With k in
hand, it consists of trying an exchange against j (his consumption
good).

November 6, 2019

5

Nioche et al. 2019

Simulations

Decision-making process. Each agent learns to estimate the success rate
of each type of exchange. This allows it to estimate the time needed to
get its consumption good depending on the choice is made.

Success rate estimates for each exchange type are based on a
reinforcement learning process. At time step t, when an agent attempts
to exchange i against j, it updates the success rate estimation
associated to the exchange of type (i, j), noted eij according to:

et+1 ij = et

ij + α · (s − et

ij)

(1) 

with α ∈ [0, 1], a free parameter and s, a binary variable such as s = 1
if the agent succeeded in his exchange, 0 otherwise. α is a learning
rate which defines to which extent an agent takes into account his
latest attempted exchange. If α = 1, the agent considers only his latest
attempted exchange. If α = 0, the agent does not take into account the
new observations of failure or success of the last attempted exchange.

When making a decision, each agent considers the expected temporal
interval between the time of choice and the time he gets his consumption
good. It is assumed that the longer the time interval, the lower the
value for the agent. Let v(ij) be the value associated to the choice ij
(i.e. exchange i against j) and ∆ij the estimation by the agent of the
time that will be spent before consumption if he chooses ij:

v(ij) = 1/(1 + β)∆ij

(2) 

with β > 0, a free parameter. β is a discount factor parameter: the
closer to 0, the more subjective values are discounted with time
(Osborne, 2016). Since it takes at least one unit of time for the agent
to get its consumption good, the value function v is bounded between 0
and 1.

We assume that for each exchange of type (i, j), the agent has an
estimation of the success rate associated to this type of exchange
(eij). The higher the estimated success rate, the lower the estimated
time to succeed in this exchange. Let δij be the estimated time to
achieve a type-ij exchange:

δij = 1/eij

(3) 

For a type-ij agent, ∆ij = δij. If a type-ik agent (with k (cid:54)= j),
the value of ∆ij depends on the action policy chosen by the agent, as
∆ij would be equal in this case to the sum of the δ- values for each
intermediary exchange planned by the agent. For instance, for a type-ik
agent following an indirect exchange strategy with good j, ∆ij = δij +
δjk. An exhaustive description of valuation functions for the specific
case where G = 3 is given in the supplementary section.

Agents make decisions using a probabilistic decision rule. The standard
approach is to use a soft- max function to introduce stochasticity in
choice (Sutton and Barto, 1998). However, Apesteguia and Ballester
(2018) show that the combination of a softmax rule and either a
risk-sensitivity or a temporal discounting model can be problematic, as
the parameter describing the risk-sensitivity discounting effect can
have a non-monotonic effect on the variable of interest. For this
reason, the rule implemented is a simple (cid:15)-rule (Sutton and
Barto, 1998). Let v(ij) be the value associated

November 6, 2019

6

Nioche et al. 2019

with choice ij and p(ij), the probability to choose to exchange i
against j. p(ij) is computed as follows:

(cid:40)

p(ij) =

1 − γ γ/(G − 1) otherwise.

if ∀k : v(ij) > v(ik),

(4) 

with γ ∈ [0, 1], a free parameter. γ is an exploitation-exploration rate
(Sutton and Barto, 1998): the lower the γ-value, the more prone the
agent will be to choose the option with the highest subjective value. On
the contrary, the higher the γ-value, the more the agent will be prone
to choose another option.

Protocol & parametrization. We ran 10 800 simulations with G = 3 and 10
800 simulations with G = 4. Each simulation lasted 100 time-steps. The
exploration parameter ((cid:15)) was varied between 0.10 and 0.15. The
learning rate (α) was varied between 0.10 and 0.25. The discount factor
(β) was varied between 0.80 and 1.20. The initial values of success rate
estimates for all types of exchange were set to 1. The fact that the
initial values were set to 1 precluded the presence of bias in
preferences (such as bias such as the appearance of commodity money was
more likely). With these values, the value associated with exchanging
his production good against his consumption good was indeed higher than
the value of any other exchange for all agents, implying that all agents
were preferring the direct exchange strategy at the first time-step.

When G = 3, x31 was set to 50 while x12 and x23 were varied between 10
and 200. When G = 4, x41 and x12 were set to 50 (following results from
simulations with G = 3) while x23 and x34 were varied between 10 and
200.

Artificial experiments. We ran 4 separate simulations before the
experiment using the same distribution of agents as for experiments (2
matching the conditions of Experiment I and 2 match- ing the conditions
of Experiment II). The cognitive parametrization of the agents was: α =
.175, β = 1.000 & γ = .125 (these values correspond to the average value
of each parameter used for the simulations).

Post-hoc simulations. We fitted our behavioral data on the
decision-making model using Scipy’s (Jones et al., 2001) differential
evolution algorithm (provided by the module optimize). We optimized
model parameters by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the model
for each subject individually.

Using the best-fit parameter values of the subjects to parametrize the
artificial agents (the dis- tribution of the best-fit parameter values
is given in Fig S18A of the Supplementary Section), we ran 4 post-hoc
simulations (2 matching the conditions of Experiment I and 2 matching
the conditions of Experiment II).

Experiment I

66 subjects have been recruited by the Maison des Sciences ´Economiques
(106–112, Subjects. boulevard de l’Hˆopital, 75013 Paris, France). The
ethics approval for this project was provided by

November 6, 2019

7

Nioche et al. 2019

the Institutional Review Board of the Paris School of Economics. In line
with ethical guidelines, all participants provided their informed
consent before proceeding to the experiment and filled in a survey
asking their age and gender. Financial compensation of 10 euros was
offered to each participant, with a bonus proportional to their score (a
subject earned a point when he succeeded to obtain its consumption good
and each point corresponded to 0.20 euros). The average reward was 15.41
euros (±1.80 STD). We noticed a gender parity (women represented 48.5%
and men 51.5%). The average age was 29.42 (±12.55 STD).

Task. A subject plays the role of a producer of a good i and a consumer
of a good j, in an economy comprising either 30 (uniform condition) or
36 (non-uniform condition) subjects. Dur- ing 50 time steps, he has to
choose which type of exchange he wants to try, among two options (e.g.,
with good 1 in hand, he has to choose between trying to exchange good 1
against good 2, or good 1 against good 3). The only information he gets
is whether he succeeded or not in the exchange. Further details are
provided in the supplementary section.

Following the assumption that a visually appealing serious-game would
in- User interface. crease the subject’s engagement (Wanner, 2014;
Comello et al., 2016) and induce naturalistic decision-making (Harrison
and List, 2004), we chose to design a game-inspired interface instead of
a textual interface (see Fig. 1).

Experimental conditions. All goods being identical, we arbitrarily chose
the good 1 as the ‘target’, that is to say, the good that we wanted to
see emerge. Following the simulation results, we contrasted two modes of
distributions, either promoting the money emergence or preclud- ing it.
Each subject went through only one of the two conditions. The conditions
differ by the distribution of agents among types.

• Uniform (U). There is an equal number of agents of each type.

• Non-uniform and promoting the use of a medium of exchange (NUPM). The
number of agents for a specific type depends on whether this type
involves producing or consuming a specific good, that we arbitrarily
chose to be the good 1 . The number of agents for a type meeting this
condition is half the number of agents of a type not meeting this
condition.

The two conditions were the following:

1.  G = 3 and U-distribution. x31, x12 and x23 were set to 10.
2.  G = 3 and NUPM-distribution. x31 and x12 were equal to 9 but the
    value of x23 was doubled (18)—the choice of setting x31 and x12 to 9
    instead of 10 and x23 to 18 instead of 20 is due to the absence of
    some subjects the day the experiment took place.

Analysis. With three goods in circulation, one type of agent can use the
good 1 as a medium of exchange: Agents that produce good 2 and consume
good 3. We thus measured for each agent belonging to the type (2, 3),
the indirect exchange rate involving good 1. That is the frequency rate
at which a subject of type (2, 3) asks for the good 1 to use it as a
medium of exchange to get his

November 6, 2019

8

Nioche et al. 2019

consumption good 3 from his production good 2. For statistical analysis
of the human experiment as well the experiment-like simulations, we
averaged this measure overtime for the last third of the trials, to
assert learning curves were stable. We then compared these results
across uniform and non-uniform distributions of agent types. As we did
not expect a normal distribution of data due to clustering effects at
the boundaries of our scale, assessment of statistic relevance of our
observations has been made with Mann-Whitney’s U ranking test (Mann and
Whitney, 1947), applying Bonferroni’s corrections for multiple
comparisons. We set the significance threshold at 5%.

Experiment II

100 subjects have been recruited under the same conditions as for
Experiment I. The Subjects. remuneration was computed the same way and
the average reward was 14.29 euros (±1.53 STD). We also noticed a gender
parity (women represented 50.0% and men 50.0%). The average age was
28.97 years old (±13.01 STD).

Task. The task is similar to Experiment I, except that they were 4 goods
in circulation and that economies were comprising either 40 (uniform
condition) or 60 (non-uniform condition) subjects. Also, as a
consequence of having 4 goods in circulation, subjects were having 3
alter- natives each time, instead of 2 (for instance, with the good 1 in
hand, they had a choice between trying to exchange it against the good
2, 3 or 4).

Experimental conditions. As in experiment I, the parametrization of the
economies for each condition has been based on the simulation results
(see Fig. 2). Hence, the distribution was either uniform (U), either
non-uniform promoting the use of a medium of exchange (NUPM):

1.  G = 4 and U-distribution. x41, x12, x23, x34 were set to 10.
2.  G = 4 and NUPM-distribution. x41, and x12 were still equal to 10 but
    the values of x23

and x34 were doubled (20).

Analysis. With four goods in circulation, two agent types can use the
good 1 as a medium of exchange: Agents that produce good 2 and consume
good 3 and agents that produce good 3 and consume good 4. We measured
for each agent belonging to the type (2, 3) and (3, 4) the frequency
rate at which a subject asks to trade its production good for the good 1
to obtain its consumption good. For statistical analysis of the human
experiment as well the experiment-like simulations, we averaged this
measure overtime for the last third of the trials, to assert learning
curves were stable. We then compared these results across the uniform
and non-uniform dis- tribution of agent types. As we did not expect a
normal distribution of data due to clustering effects at the boundaries
of our scale, assessment of statistic relevance of our observations has
been made with Mann-Whitney’s U ranking test (Mann and Whitney, 1947),
applying Bonfer- roni’s corrections for multiple comparisons. We set the
significance threshold at 5%.

November 6, 2019

9

Nioche et al. 2019

The Supplementary section provides further details, and in particular a
summary of the experi- ment parametrization in tables S1 and S2.

Results

Simulations.

3 goods setting. When G = 3, the highest frequency of indirect exchanges
with good 1 is observed when the value of x31 is equal to that of x12
and when the value of x23 is at least twice that of x31 (see Fig. 2).
One may notice that the use of a uniform distribution of agent types
(x31 = 50, x12 = 50, x23 = 50) results in a low frequency of indirect
exchanges with good 1.

4 goods setting. When G = 4, the highest frequency of indirect exchanges
with good 1 is observed when the values of x23 and x34 are nearly twice
that of x41 and x12 (see Fig. 2). The use of a uniform agent type
distribution (x41 = 50, x12 = 50, x23 = 50, x34 = 50) results in a low
frequency of indirect exchanges with good 1.

Experimental setup. Put together, these results led us to formulate the
following operational hypotheses regarding our experiments: (i) setting
the number of one particular type of agents to half of the other agent
types promotes the use of its production good as a medium of exchange
(ii) setting the number of agents of each type equal precludes the
emergence of a medium of exchange.

Hence, for the Experiment I, we set the value of x12 equal to that of
x31 and set the value of x23 twice that of x31 for the simulations under
experimental conditions with G = 3 where our goal was to promote money
emergence (see Fig. 3). For the Experiment II, we set the value of x12
equal to that of x41 and to set the value of x23 and x34 twice that of
x41 for the simulations under experimental conditions with G = 4 where
our goal was to promote money emergence (see Fig. 4).

Experiment I

Artificial experiment. To make predictions about the experiment with
human subjects, we ran 2 additional simulations, using a parametrization
identical to the two experimental conditions (see Table S1). In one of
the two conditions, we used a uniform distribution types while in the
other, we promoted the use of good 1 as a medium of exchange, by using a
non-uniform distribution of agent types (one can note that as all the
goods are identical, the choice to promote good 1 is arbitrary).

With G = 3 (see Fig. 3), we observe that the median frequency of
indirect exchanges with good 1 by agents of type (2, 3) is (i) above
chance level, and (ii) significantly greater in the NUPM– distribution
than in the U-distribution (U = 21.0, p < 0.001∗, n = 28). This means
that agents that neither produce the good 1 nor consume it try to obtain
it when they have their production

November 6, 2019

10

Nioche et al. 2019

good in the hand and, once in the hand, try to obtain their consumption
good using it as an intermediary good.

In line with the results of the simulation, we observe that the median
Human experiment. frequency of indirect exchanges with good 1 by
subjects of type (2, 3) is (i) above chance level, and (ii)
significantly greater in the NUPM–distribution than in the
U-distribution (U = 50.5, p = 0.031∗, n = 28).

. The simulations using the best-fit parameter values led to results
that Post-hoc simulations have the same pattern as the experimental
results. With three goods we observe that the median frequency of
indirect exchanges with good 1 by agents of type (2, 3) is significantly
greater in the NUPM-distribution than in the U-distribution (U = 48.0, p
= 0.023∗, n = 28).

Experiment II

Artificial experiment. To make predictions about the experiment with
human subjects, we ran two additional simulations, using a
parametrization identical to the two experimental con- ditions (see
Table S2). In one of the two conditions, we used a uniform distribution
types while in the other, we promoted the use of good 1 as a medium of
exchange, by using a non-uniform distribution of agent types (one can
note that as all the goods are identical, the choice to promote good 1
is arbitrary).

With G = 4, two types of agent are able to use good 1 as a medium of
exchange: (2, 3) and (3, 4). We observe that the median frequency of
indirect exchanges with good 1 by (2, 3) agents (see Fig. 4A) is (i)
above chance level, and (ii) significantly greater in the
NUPM–distribution than in the U-distribution (U = 21.0, p < 0.001∗, n =
30). Similarly, the median frequency of indirect exchanges with good 1
by (3, 4) agents (see Fig. 4B) (i) is above chance level, and (ii)
significantly greater in the NUPM–distribution than in the
U-distribution ( U = 28.0, p = 0.002∗, n = 30).

For the condition with G = 4, we expected the use of the good 1 as Human
experiment. money to be promoted by both agent types (2, 3) and (3, 4).
But contrary to what has been observed in the artificial agents, the
median frequency of indirect exchanges with good 1 by agents of type (2,
3) (see Fig. 4A) is not significantly greater in the NUPM–distribution
than in the U-distribution (U = 56.0, p = 0.056, n = 30). Similarly, the
median frequency of indirect exchanges with good 1 by agents of type (3,
4) (see Fig. 4B) is not significantly greater in the NUPM–distribution
than in the U-distribution (U = 77.5, p = 0.333, n = 30).

Post-hoc simulations. The simulations using the best-fit parameters
value led to results that have the same pattern as the experimental
results. The median frequency of indirect exchanges with good 1 by
agents of type (2, 3) is not significantly different in the
NUPM-distribution than in the U-distribution (U = 99.0, p = 0.982, n =
30), as well as for agents of type (3, 4) (U = 78.5, p = 0.355, n = 30).

November 6, 2019

11

Nioche et al. 2019

Supplementary section provides more details for both experiments, in
particular a summary of the statistical tests (see Table S3), a short
demographic analysis (see figures S1, S2, and Table S4), the
representation of individual behavior (see figures S3 and S4), a
sensitivity analysis to free parameters (see Fig. S5 and Table S5), some
post hoc simulations varying some environment parameters and also using
alternative decision-making models (see figures S7, S8, S10, S11, S12,
S13, S14, S15, S16, S17, and tables S7 and S8), more details about the
model fitting and a model comparison (see figures S6, S18, S19, and
tables S6, S9, S10).

Discussion

The results obtained by simulation are in line with our initial
assumption: the emergence of com- modity money is possible in a
decentralized economy with agents endowed with limited compu- tational
abilities and having very poor information on the global state of the
economy. Indeed, they show that manipulating the agent type distribution
is sufficient to foster the emergence of a unique medium of exchange in
a 3 goods economy as well as in a 4 goods economy.

To assess the robustness of these computational results, we conducted
two experiments. In con- trast to previous experimental studies (Marimon
et al., 1990; Duffy, 2001; Kindler et al., 2017), human subjects did not
have access to any statistic regarding the current state of the economy
in which they were evolving, and in particular the choices of the other
participants. The only feedback that they got at each iteration of the
game was whether the exchange was successful. Also, contrary to recent
experimental studies (Duffy and Puzzello, 2014; Anbarci et al., 2015;
Ding et al., 2018; Jiang and Zhang, 2018; Davis et al., 2019; Rietz,
2019), there is no monetary authority, and money emerges endogenously
since no good is intrinsically devised to become a medium of exchange.

In the 3 goods setting experiment, the experimental results were
consistent with the computa- tional results, the manipulation of the
agent type distribution being effective in promoting the use of a unique
medium of exchange. Although, in the 4 goods setting experiment, this
manipu- lation turned out to be ineffective. The results with a 3 goods
economy extend precedent works in artificial agents and human using the
Kiyotaki & Wright’s framework (Marimon et al., 1990; Duffy, 2001;
Kindler et al., 2017). In particular, it shows that coordination over a
unique medium of exchange is also possible in an Iwai-like environment
(Iwai, 1996). Furthermore, it shows that the monetary coordination does
not even require agents to have extended knowledge of other players’
preferences or to construct a sophisticated belief system: a trial and
error approach—in our case, a simple reinforcement learning mechanism—is
sufficient. Of course, this coordina- tion between agents over a unique
medium of exchange is not systematic: our results suggest that
structural constraints are necessary, such as a non-equal distribution
of agents over types in our environment. This can be interpreted as the
fact that a particular endowment-need distri- bution can render
sensitive the benefits of coordinating on a unique medium of exchange,
thus highlighting interaction effects between economic structure and
agents’ cognition.

However, by raising the number of goods from 3 to 4, and placing human
subjects under the same conditions as our artificial agents, we were not
able to replicate the results obtained by simulations. This failure may
carry several interpretations. We tackle some of those thereafter.

November 6, 2019

12

Nioche et al. 2019

Except for the first one, they have in common to assume that an
additional good greatly increases the difficulty to coordinate, which is
the most probable cause of failure. (i) “It is due to specific features
of the sample.” We possess data from one hundred subjects, but this
corresponds to data for only two economies and we expected convergence
for only one of them. It is indeed difficult to reject the possibility
that the lack of convergence over a medium of exchange for the concerned
economy is specific to our sample.

(ii) “The subjects (or a sub-group of the subjects) were unable to
     endorse the primary cost of indirect exchange (i.e., they have a
     strong bias towards a direct exchange strategy)”. Indeed, in a
     Kiyotaki & Wright environment (Kiyotaki and Wright, 1989, 1993), in
     the specific case where a speculative equilibrium is expected—that
     is to say when the monetary good has a higher storage cost than the
     other good—, it has been noted that a non-negligible part of
     subjects had difficulties to endorse the primary cost implied by
     the use of the monetary good as a medium of exchange (i.e. to
     speculate) (Duffy and Ochs, 1999; Kindler et al., 2017). It means
     that some subjects that neither produce or consume the monetary
     good were reluctant to engage in indirect exchange strategies.
     Similarly, our experimental results show that part of the subjects
     that were supposed to proceed to indirect exchanges and suffer from
     a primary temporal cost, did not adopt such strategies, although
     most of the subjects that were supposed to use direct exchanges did
     so (see for instance the results for the condition with a
     non-uniform distribution promoting the good 1 with four goods
     depicted in the Fig.4). As in our protocol, subjects do not play
     against artificial agents that use a deterministic algorithm but
     against other human subjects, it is nonetheless difficult to tell
     whether subjects playing (almost) always a direct exchange strategy
     did it because of the behavior of other subjects, or because they
     were initially strongly biased toward this option.

(iii) “Subjects were lacking information to coordinate.” Since the level
      of information for artifi- cial agents was strictly identical to
      that of humans, it is probably for other reasons than because of a
      lack of information. Indeed, reinforcement learning, although
      effective, is far from being the most sophisticated learning
      model. It is unlikely that human subjects have failed to coordi-
      nate on a single medium of exchange due to more limited cognitive
      abilities than agents using reinforcement learning.

(iv) “The psychological model used for the simulations is
     unappropriated, that is the reason why it was partly ineffective in
     producing accurate predictions.” Several studies point out the fact
     that reinforcement learning models fit well the behavior of human
     subjects in economic contexts (Roth and Erev, 1995; Erev and Roth,
     1998; Feltovich, 2000), and specifically for modeling behavior in a
     coordination game over a unique medium of exchange (Duffy and Ochs,
     1999; Duffy, 2001; Kindler et al., 2017). However, to test the
     relevance of such an interpretation, we proceeded to a post hoc
     analysis (see Supplementary section).

We fitted the behavioral data with our reinforcement learning model, and
run simulations using the best-value parameters of each subject. We
obtained the same pattern as the experimental results: in the
three-goods setting, the use of a medium of exchange is promoted in the
condition of non-uniform distribution while in the four-goods setting,
the use of a medium of exchange was not promoted as we expected. Hence,
using the adequate set of cognitive parameters, we could replicate the
experimental results, whether positive or null.

(v) “Assuming the cognitive model as true, this could be because the
    artificial agents from a sin- gle economy were having homogeneous
    cognitive features, while it exists certain heterogeneity

November 6, 2019

13

Nioche et al. 2019

among the human subjects that could make the coordination more
difficult”. To test the relevance of this interpretation, after fitting
the behavioral data with the model, we simulated an homoge- neous
population using as cognitive parameter values the average best value
for each cognitive parameter after fitting the behavioral data (instead
of simulating an heterogeneous population with the parameters of a
single agent being the best-value parameters of a subject fit). However,
the pattern remained unchanged: the non-uniform distribution of agent
types promotes the use of a medium of exchange with three goods, but not
with four.

(vi) “More trials would have allowed subjects to overcome the complexity
     of coordination at 4 goods.” To test the relevance of this
     interpretation, after fitting the behavioral data with the model,
     we simulated a population of (heterogeneous) agents with the
     parameters of every single agent being the best-fit parameter
     values of a single subject for a larger number of iteration (n =
     500 instead of 50). Here, the results changed (see Supplementary
     section), as the non- uniform distribution of agent types promotes
     the use of a medium of exchange in both settings with a large
     number of trials. This indicates that an extended time could have
     allowed the human subjects to modify slowly their behavior towards
     the use of a medium of exchange, raising the questions about the
     pragmatic possibility of such large scale experiments for a long
     time.

Nevertheless, these results seem to contribute to a better understanding
of the processes under- lying the coordination over a unique medium of
exchange. Hence, in the 3 goods setting, the results in artificial
agents, as well as those obtained in human, show that decision-makers do
not need to have any expertise concerning the economic system in which
they evolve to allow this system to acquire certain remarkable
macroeconomic properties—such as the existence of a unique medium of
exchange. Said differently, these results show that the members of an
eco- nomic system do not need to know the macroeconomic properties of
the system to be able to influence them.

Although, the attempt to test the robustness of the results by
considering a 4 good setting ap- pears to be unsuccessful. The results
obtained by simulation and with human subjects being not completely in
line, it is difficult to draw strong inferences regarding the
possibility of money emergence under informational constraints in a more
than three goods economy. Also, these negative results indicate the
importance to take into account the temporal aspect of the coordi-
nation processes: even if we possess evidence for the existence of a
steady-state for an economic system with artificial agents (or by
mathematical proof), it could be that, due to the complexity of the
coordination process, the time for obtaining with humans is so long that
in real-world con- text, it would be a good approximation to say that it
would never occur. At least, in the present context of money, the
phenomenon already occurred, so it just remains to continue to
investigate how such large scale coordination has been possible, given
the complexity of the interactions.

In previous studies (Duffy and Ochs, 1999; Duffy, 2001; Lefebvre et al.,
2018), subjects were con- stantly provided with economy statistics, such
as the current distribution of goods or agent types. From this
information, subjects can infer exchanges’ success probabilities. In
that sense, deci- sions are made by description: subjects learn about
the probabilistic consequences of their action by consulting
descriptions of action consequences and probabilities. In contrast here,
subjects are not provided with any information related to the state of
the economy, decisions are therefore made by experience: subjects’
learning of outcome probabilities is based on their own experience. In
the literature, one concept refers to these two kinds of decision-making
systems supposed to

November 6, 2019

14

Nioche et al. 2019

result in behavioral discrepancies: the description-experience gap
(Wulff et al., 2018).

It has been observed that decision by experience is subject to biases
that are absent in decision by description. Preferential learning from
positive outcomes (rather than negative outcomes) prediction errors is
for instance often observed (Palminteri et al., 2017; Lefebvre et al.,
2017; den Ouden et al., 2013; Frank et al., 2007; Van Den Bos et al.,
2012; Aberg et al., 2016). Interestingly, our subjects also present this
asymmetry in value-update and seem to preferentially learn from
exchanges that result in better-than-expected outcomes (see Fig. S18F).
Investigating how such bias affects the coordination of agents in an
experience-based money emergence paradigm could then constitute a
relevant subject for further studies.

November 6, 2019

15

Nioche et al. 2019

References

Aberg, K. C., Doell, K. C., and Schwartz, S. (2016). Linking individual
learning styles to approach- avoidance motivational traits and
computational aspects of reinforcement learning. PloS one,
11(11):e0166675.

Aiyagari, S. R. and Wallace, N. (1991). Existence of steady states with
positive consumption in

the kiyotaki-wright model. The Review of Economic Studies,
58(5):901–916.

Anbarci, N., Dutu, R., and Feltovich, N. (2015). Inflation tax in the
lab: a theoretical and experi- mental study of competitive search
equilibrium with inflation. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
61:17–33.

Apesteguia, J. and Ballester, M. A. (2018). Monotone stochastic choice
models: The case of risk

and time preferences. Journal of Political Economy, 126(1):74–106.

Branch, W. and McGough, B. (2016). Heterogeneous beliefs and trading
inefficiencies. Journal of

Economic Theory, 163:786–818.

Brown, P. M. (1996). Experimental evidence on money as a medium of
exchange. Journal of

Economic Dynamics and Control, 20(4):583–600.

Comello, M. L. G., Qian, X., Deal, A. M., Ribisl, K. M., Linnan, L. A.,
and Tate, D. F. (2016). Impact of game-inspired infographics on user
engagement and information processing in an ehealth program. Journal of
medical Internet research, 18(9).

Davis, D. D., Korenok, O., Norman, P., Sultanum, B., and Wright, R.
(2019). Playing with money.

den Ouden, H. E., Daw, N. D., Fernandez, G., Elshout, J. A., Rijpkema,
M., Hoogman, M., Franke, B., and Cools, R. (2013). Dissociable effects
of dopamine and serotonin on reversal learning. Neuron, 80(4):1090–1100.

Diamond, P. (1984). Money in search equilibrium. Econometrica: Journal
of the Econometric

Society, pages 1–20.

Ding, S., Lugovskyy, V., Puzzello, D., Tucker, S., and Williams, A.
(2018). Cash versus extra- credit incentives in experimental asset
markets. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 150:19–27.

Duffy, J. (2001). Learning to speculate: Experiments with artificial and
real agents. Journal of

Economic Dynamics and Control, 25(3-4):295–319.

Duffy, J. and Ochs, J. (1999). Emergence of money as a medium of
exchange: An experimental

study. American Economic Review, 89(4):847–877.

Duffy, J. and Puzzello, D. (2014). Gift exchange versus monetary
exchange: Theory and evidence.

American economic review, 104(6):1735–76.

Erev, I. and Roth, A. E. (1998). Predicting how people play games:
Reinforcement learning in experimental games with unique, mixed strategy
equilibria. American economic review, pages 848–881.

November 6, 2019

16

Nioche et al. 2019

Feltovich, N. (2000). Reinforcement-based vs. belief-based learning
models in experimental

asymmetric-information games. Econometrica, 68(3):605–641.

Frank, M. J., Moustafa, A. A., Haughey, H. M., Curran, T., and
Hutchison, K. E. (2007). Genetic triple dissociation reveals multiple
roles for dopamine in reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104(41):16311–16316.

Harrison, G. W. and List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of
Economic literature, 42(4):1009–

1055. 

Iwai, K. (1996). The boostrap theory of money: A search-theoretic
foundation of monetary eco-

nomics. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 7(4):451–477.

Jiang, J. H. and Zhang, C. (2018). Competing currencies in the
laboratory. Journal of Economic

Behavior & Organization, 154:253–280.

Jones, E., Oliphant, T., and Peterson, P. (2001). SciPy: Open source
scientific tools for Python.

Jones, R. A. (1976). The origin and development of media of exchange.
Journal of Political Econ-

omy, 84(4, Part 1):757–775.

Kehoe, T. J., Kiyotaki, N., and Wright, R. (1993). More on money as a
medium of exchange.

Economic Theory, 3(2):297–314.

Kindler, A., Bourgeois-Gironde, S., Lefebvre, G., and Solomon, S.
(2017). New leads in speculative

behavior. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications,
467:365–379.

Kiyotaki, N. and Wright, R. (1989). On money as a medium of exchange.
Journal of political

Economy, 97(4):927–954.

Kiyotaki, N. and Wright, R. (1991). A contribution to the pure theory of
money. Journal of

Economic Theory, 53(2):215–235.

Kiyotaki, N. and Wright, R. (1993). A search-theoretic approach to
monetary economics. The

American Economic Review, pages 63–77.

Lefebvre, G., Lebreton, M., Meyniel, F., Bourgeois-Gironde, S., and
Palminteri, S. (2017). Be- havioural and neural characterization of
optimistic reinforcement learning. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(4):0067.

Lefebvre, G., Nioche, A., Bourgeois-Gironde, S., and Palminteri, S.
(2018). Contrasting tempo- ral difference and opportunity cost
reinforcement learning in an empirical money-emergence paradigm.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(49):E11446–E11454.

Luo, G. Y. (1998). The evolution of money as a medium of exchange.
Journal of Economic Dynamics

and Control, 23(3):415–458.

Mann, H. B. and Whitney, D. R. (1947). On a test of whether one of two
random variables is

stochastically larger than the other. The annals of mathematical
statistics, pages 50–60.

November 6, 2019

17

Nioche et al. 2019

Marimon, R., McGrattan, E., and Sargent, T. J. (1990). Money as a medium
of exchange in an econ- omy with artificially intelligent agents.
Journal of Economic dynamics and control, 14(2):329– 373.

Menger, K. (1892). On the origin of money. The Economic Journal,
2(6):239–255.

Muth, J. F. (1961). Rational expectations and the theory of price
movements. Econometrica:

Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 315–335.

Nosal, E. and Rocheteau, G. (2011). Money, payments, and liquidity. MIT
press.

Oh, S. (1989). A theory of a generally acceptable medium of exchange and
barter. Journal of

Monetary Economics, 23(1):101–119.

Osborne, M. (2016). Exponential versus hyperbolic discounting: a
theoretical analysis. Available

at SSRN 2518162.

Palminteri, S., Lefebvre, G., Kilford, E. J., and Blakemore, S.-J.
(2017). Confirmation bias in human reinforcement learning: Evidence from
counterfactual feedback processing. PLoS computa- tional biology,
13(8):e1005684.

Rietz, J. (2019). Secondary currency acceptance: Experimental evidence
with a dual currency

search model. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization.

Roth, A. E. and Erev, I. (1995). Learning in extensive-form games:
Experimental data and simple

dynamic models in the intermediate term. Games and economic behavior,
8(1):164–212.

Shi, S. (1995). Money and prices: a model of search and bargaining.
Journal of Economic Theory,

67(2):467–496.

Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An
introduction, volume 1. MIT

press Cambridge.

Van Den Bos, W., Cohen, M. X., Kahnt, T., and Crone, E. A. (2012).
Striatum–medial prefrontal cortex connectivity predicts developmental
changes in reinforcement learning. Cerebral cortex, 22(6):1247–1255.

Wanner, D. (2014). Serious economic games: Designing a simulation game
for an economic experiment. In International Conference of Design, User
Experience, and Usability, pages 782– 793. Springer.

Wright, R. (1995). Search, evolution, and money. Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control,

19(1-2):181–206.

Wulff, D. U., Mergenthaler-Canseco, M., and Hertwig, R. (2018). A
meta-analytic review of two modes of learning and the
description-experience gap. Psychological bulletin, 144(2):140.

November 6, 2019

18

Nioche et al. 2019

Code & data availability. The software we used was based on a
client/server architecture. The client part has been developed using the
Unity game engine. The application ran on 7(cid:48)(cid:48) Android
tablets. The assets of the application are available at
https://github.com/AurelienNioche/ MoneyApp. The experiment server was
hosted on a local server and has been developed in Python. The code of
the server part is available at
https://github.com/AurelienNioche/MoneyServer. The analysis program is
available at https://github.com/AurelienNioche/MoneyAnalysis.

The data are available at the same address than the analysis program:
https://github.com/ AurelienNioche/MoneyAnalysis.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR- 16-CE38-0003). The funders had no role in study design,
data collection, and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work
for publication.

Author Contributions. A.N. and B.G. wrote the code, performed the
experiments and the data analysis; A.N., B.G., G.L., T.B., N.R., and
S.B.-G. designed the study and co-wrote the manuscript.

Competing Interests. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

November 6, 2019

19

Nioche et al. 2019

Figure 1. User interface. Screen-shots corresponding to a 3 good (wood,
wheat, and stone) economy. The subject plays the role of a producer of
wood, consumer of wheat. A. Decision-making phase. B. Wait- ing screen
while other players also take a decision. C. Successful exchange. D.
Unsuccessful exchange.

November 6, 2019

20

Nioche et al. 2019

Figure 2. Simulation: Influence of agents distribution on the use of a
medium of exchange. Based on these simulation results, we deduced the
optimal experimental conditions required to see money emerge with human
subjects. A. The phase diagram summarizes the results of 10,400
simulations with 3 goods.The number of type (3, 1) agents is set to 50
while the number of agents of type (1, 2) and (2, 3) varies between 10
and 200 (corresponding respectively to the values on the x-axis and
y-axis). The hotter the color, the higher the indirect exchange
frequency involving good 1 as a medium of exchange. In a three goods
economy, the highest frequency of indirect exchanges with good 1
observed is when the value x12 as well the value of x23 is nearly twice
that of x31. B. Similarly, the phase diagram on B panel summarizes the
results of 10,400 simulations with 4 goods. The number of agent of types
(4, 1) and (1, 2) is set at 50 while the the number of agents of type
(2, 3) and (3, 4) varies between 10 and 200 (corresponding respectively
to the values on the x-axis and y-axis). In a four goods economy, the
highest frequency of indirect exchanges with good 1 observed is when the
value x23 as well the value of x34 is nearly twice that of x12 and x41.

November 6, 2019

21

1050100150200x121050100150200x23A3
goods0.250.501050100150200x121050100150200x23B4 goods0.33Nioche et
al. 2019

Figure 3. Experiment I: The use of a medium of exchange with three goods
in circulation. We contrast the U-distribution of agent types (blue
color) with the NUPM-distribution (orange color). In a three goods
economy, only the (2, 3) type of agent can use Good 1 as money. The left
side plots represent the moving median (±STD) of the frequency of use of
a medium of exchange for each individual over time with a 25 time-step
window. On the box plots (right side), each dot represents the averaged
frequency over time for either one artificial agent (panel A and panel
C), or one human subject (panel B) belonging to the (2, 3) agent type.
The gray dotted lines indicate the chance level. A. We observe that in
the NUPM- distribution, the median frequency of indirect exchanges
involving good 1 is significantly greater than in the U-distribution (p
< 0.05), showing that the good 1 is used as a medium of exchange
significantly more frequently in the NUPM-distribution than in the
U-distribution. B. We replicate this result with human subjects: in the
NUPM-distribution, the median frequency of indirect exchanges involving
good 1 is significantly greater than in the U-distribution (p < 0.05).
C. Running post-hoc simulations with the best-fit parameters of the
human subjects, we obtain the same pattern as the experimental results:
the median frequency of indirect exchanges involving good 1 is
significantly greater than in the U-distribution (p < 0.05).

November 6, 2019

22

02550t0.00.51.0Freq. ind. ex. with good 1ASimulation - Type
(2,3)UniformNon-uniform0.00.51.0Freq. ind. ex. with good 1Simulation -
Type (2,3)02550t0.00.51.0Freq. ind. ex. with good 1BHuman - Type
(2,3)UniformNon-uniform0.00.51.0Freq. ind. ex. with good 1Human - Type
(2,3)02550t0.00.51.0Freq. ind. ex. with good 1CPost-Hoc Sim. - Type
(2,3)UniformNon-uniform0.00.51.0Freq. ind. ex. with good 1Post-Hoc Sim.
- Type (2,3)Nioche et al. 2019

Figure 4. Experiment II: The use of a medium of exchange with three
goods in circulation. We contrast the U-distribution of agent types
(blue color) with the NUPM-distribution (orange color). In a four goods
economy, two types of agents that can use good 1 as money: (2, 3) and
(3, 4). The left side of each pair of plots represents the moving median
(±STD) of the frequency of use of a medium of exchange for each
individual over time with a 25 time-step window. On the box plots (right
side), each dot represents the averaged frequency over time for either
one artificial agent (panel A and panel C), or one human subject (panel
B). Results for (2, 3) agents are depicted on the two leftmost figures
of each panel, while results for (3, 4) are depicted on the two
rightmost plots. The gray dotted lines indicate the chance level. A. In
simulations and with regards to (2, 3) agents, we observe that in the
NUPM-distribution, the median frequency of indirect exchanges involving
good 1 is significantly greater than in the U-distribution (p < 0.05),
showing that good 1 is used a medium of exchange significantly more in
the NUPM-distribution than in the U-distribution. Similarly, with
artificial agents that belong to the (3, 4) type, we observe that in the
NUPM-distribution, the median frequency of indirect exchanges involving
good 1 is significantly greater than in the U-distribution (p < 0.05).
B. We do not replicate the simulation results from panel A with human
subjects: the frequency of indirect exchanges with good is not
significantly different from the U-distribution (p > 0.05). Similarly,
we do not replicate the simulation results from panel B with human
subjects (p > 0.05). C. Running post-hoc simulations with the best-fit
parameters of the human subjects, we obtain the same pattern as the
experimental results: the median frequency of indirect exchanges
involving good 1 are not significantly greater than in the
U-distribution for both agent types that are concerned (p > 0.05).

November 6, 2019

23

02550t0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind. ex. with good 1ASimulation - Type
(2,3)UniformNon-uniform0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind. ex. with good
1Simulation - Type (2,3)02550t0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind. ex. with good
1Simulation - Type (3,4)UniformNon-uniform0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind. ex.
with good 1Simulation - Type (3,4)02550t0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind. ex.
with good 1BHuman - Type (2,3)UniformNon-uniform0.000.330.661.00Freq.
ind. ex. with good 1Human - Type (2,3)02550t0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind.
ex. with good 1Human - Type (3,4)UniformNon-uniform0.000.330.661.00Freq.
ind. ex. with good 1Human - Type (3,4)02550t0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind.
ex. with good 1CPost-Hoc Sim. - Type
(2,3)UniformNon-uniform0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind. ex. with good
1Post-Hoc Sim. - Type (2,3)02550t0.000.330.661.00Freq. ind. ex. with
good 1Post-Hoc Sim. - Type (3,4)UniformNon-uniform0.000.330.661.00Freq.
ind. ex. with good 1Post-Hoc Sim. - Type (3,4)
