Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence
Michel Durampart, Philippe Bonfils, Margarida Romero

To cite this version:

Michel Durampart, Philippe Bonfils, Margarida Romero. Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial
Intelligence. Creative Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Springer Nature Switzerland,
￿hal-
pp.45-56, 2024, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture, ￿10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_4￿.
04593571￿

HAL Id: hal-04593571

https://hal.science/hal-04593571

Submitted on 29 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

4 

Digital Acculturation in the Era 
of Artificial Intelligence 

Michel Durampart, Philippe Bonfils, 
and Margarida Romero 

Abstract This chapter examines AI integration in education, concen-
trating on acculturation, as a broad movement of appropriating digital 
tools. The chapter emphasises principals’ involvement in supporting AI 
potential in schools and the complex interplay between digital tech-
nology and education. The chapter describes teachers’ transition from 
personal to educational digital use across three phases of digital accultur-
ation. It emphasises professional development by highlighting problems 
and motivations. The last part of the chapter discusses digital accul-
turation in AI and education, including medical expertise, vocational 
training, and special education. It ﬁnishes by analysing educational

M. Durampart (B) · P. Bonﬁls 
Université de Toulon, Toulon, France 
e-mail: michel.durampart@univ-tln.fr 

P. Bonﬁls 
e-mail: philippe.bonﬁls@univ-tln.fr 

M. Romero 
Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France 
e-mail: margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr; margarida.romero@unice.fr 

© The Author(s) 2024 
A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in 
Education, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_4 

45

46

M. Durampart et al.

platform organisational changes and AI’s ability to change 
learning 
dynamics and interfaces, raising new considerations about global educa-
tion systems. 

Keywords Acculturation · Digital culture · Educational technologies · 
Digital competencies 

Introduction 

The uses of educational technologies, of which artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) 
is a part, require a pedagogical reﬂection on the planning and orchestra-
tion of the learning activities. The representations and the culture of the 
actors, teachers, and students can impact the school organisation and 
are points to be taken into account in the integration of AI in educa-
tional settings (Bellas et al., 2023). This chapter pursues two objectives: 
on the one hand, to deﬁne acculturation to AI as a vast movement of 
appropriation of digital tools; and, on the other hand, in the light of the 
work of the Mediterranean Institute of Information and Communication 
(IMSIC), to analyse the digital acculturation in the AI era. 

Acculturation is deﬁned in broad terms as “the processes by which 
different cultural groups adapt to one another” (Brown & Zagefka, 
2011, p. 131), but also the process of adoption of cultural artefacts 
such as digital technologies and the reduction of the digital divide of 
certain cultural groups (Vassilakopoulou & Hustad, 2023). The process 
of acculturation in the context of artiﬁcial intelligence concerns not 
only edtech professionals but the different educational stakeholders 
who, having developed their careers absent of AI, are now adapting to 
new educational practices and different types of teaching and learning 
processes. 

Digital Acculturation from the Lens of Information 
and Communication Studies 

Information and communication sciences have helped to highlight that 
the relationship between digital technology and education is complex,

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

47

iterative, and cross sectional (Bonﬁls, 2020; Durampart, 2016; Giraudon 
et al., 2020). In this context, researchers from the IMSIC research 
lab found that digital artefacts intended for learning activities (Bernard 
et al., 2018) tend to cause tensions within the school organisation. 
School organisation is highly structured in secondary education, which 
creates a tension when innovative approaches are required to adapt to 
the opportunities afforded by AI. In this context, Meyer et al. (2023) 
consider the importance of the principal’s role in ensuring that the 
school’s pedagogical team is able to create the necessary conditions for 
change. 

Over the course of twelve years of research at the IMSIC labora-
tory, we found the concept of digital acculturation to be useful in 
classifying the broad movement of appropriation of digital technolo-
gies inﬂuencing pedagogy and educational practices. This concept arose 
as a useful heuristic in order to characterise an unstable, discontin-
uous, and diverse movement that encompasses the adoption of digital 
technology across a wide range of activities and approaches within the 
educational context. In this way, scholars working on such topics recom-
mend thinking about “digital acculturation” rather than “digital culture” 
(Durampart, 2016). The primary challenge lies in integrating this osten-
sibly digital culture within the framework of economic and social 
well-being, where digital inclusion encompasses the broader capacity 
of individuals to effectively mobilise these technologies—a critical skill 
as the knowledge economy continues to expand its inﬂuence (Duram-
part, 2016). While it is difﬁcult to recreate the breadth of the disciplines 
and initiatives in which we have been involved, we can retrace a few 
signiﬁcant steps and milestones that have helped us better comprehend 
the concept of digital acculturation. 

The studies of Pélissier et al. (2018) shows that only a minority of 
students exploit their “digital culture” with a view to integration and 
professional orientation, while showing the potential to consider creative 
pedagogies for improving the learners’ experience. Even if formal learning 
is crucial to reduce the variance in proﬁciency levels among social actors, 
it remains necessary for them to develop new creative practices in the 
use of AI in contexts other than those related to leisure and interpersonal 
relationships. The challenge of digital acculturation would therefore refer

48

M. Durampart et al.

to a form of unstable, heterogeneous and disseminated economic, social, 
and cultural capital. It is constantly called into play and questioned, with 
different modes of adoption, in various contexts, while also referring to 
successive or alternating forms of formal and informal stacked learning. 

The Three Levels of Digital Acculturation 

impetus for IMSIC’s research projects on digital acculturation 
The 
derived from a study carried out as part of the Provence-Alpes-Côte 
d’Azur (PACA) region’s ICT observatory (Pélissier et al., 2013). Further 
insights were gathered from the Numécole project, an initiative from the 
Ministry of National Education to identify the digital uses of technology 
among French teachers with the aim of improving student outcomes 
and facilitating teachers’ pedagogical practices (Durampart, 2016) It is 
from these projects that we developed the following framework to better 
understand the role of digital acculturation and its role in effectively 
navigating and utilising digital tools. This framework comprises three 
distinct levels; the acquisition of technological knowledge, the interac-
tion between personal and professional uses of technology, and the use 
of technology in pedagogical practices. 

First Level of Digital Acculturation 

At the initial level of digital acculturation, teachers utilise digital tools 
for personal use rather than for interchange or sharing. The ﬁrst stage of 
digital acculturation is concerned with knowledge acquisition through 
training. 82% of instructors between the ages of 31 and 50 (repre-
senting 77% of our respondents) completed pre-service teacher training.1 
73% of them claim they use technology frequently, but 68% complain 
about insufﬁcient training overall. Again, these teachers are more likely to

1 The data derives from a Numécole research program occuring between 2014 and 2016. A 
questionnaire was sent to teachers in November 2015 with the aim of providing a quantitative 
analysis of experimentation with digital applications in the PACA region. Over 200 teachers 
responded representing 80 classes. 

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

49

utilise information and communication technology (ICT) as a personal 
tool than as a tool for trade or sharing. Examples include software trials, 
do-it-yourself projects, self-learning, as well as shared learning in co-
learning and multi-learning circumstances. These encounters, charac-
terised by a variety of demands and expectations aimed at simplifying 
everyday life, serve as barriers to implementing these talents profession-
ally. As a result, the absence of professional training makes developing an 
advanced degree of expertise impossible. 

Second Level of Digital Acculturation 

The integration of digital technology at the second level of digital accul-
turation seeks to promote the interaction between school and home and 
puts a range of technological applications at the service of educational 
activities. This level is situated in an unsuccessful relationship between 
private, personal, and domestic learning and those of the professional 
or educational world. The so-called innovative digital initiatives (Project 
Incubateurs, 2018–2019) are part of a worldwide ambition to employ 
digital media to enhance continuity between school and home. 

However, moving digital applications from the private to the profes-
sional realm requires rehabilitation and instructional supervision. As 
one teacher commented on her survey, “The tablets are entering the 
establishment (i.e. schools) because they have entered our lives” (Duram-
part, 2016). This teacher also highlighted the importance of combining 
tablet use with an effective method of information retrieval to maximise 
the devices’ potential in the classroom. This phenomenon, known as 
porosity, refers to the permeation of digital technology into the school 
environment, directly impacting the organisation of schools. 

Third Level of Digital Acculturation 

The third level of digital acculturation involves teaching using digital 
technologies and includes the use of digital tools in education. Here 
again, the Numécole project was used to conduct extensive observa-
included observations at
tions on digital 

learning. This programme 

50

M. Durampart et al.

Toulon’s underprivileged high schools and middle schools, study days 
with teachers, and a variety of digital incubator projects. The questions 
that emerged from these observations reﬂect the study’s shifting focus 
from how digital tools are used to examining the speciﬁc interfaces from 
which these tools are accessed and interacted. Teachers participating in 
the Numécole experiment describe their professional uses of digital tech-
nology as word processing (90% of teachers), audiovisual documents 
(86%), web browsers (72%), teacher-created software or documents 
(69%), educational websites (62%), desktop publishing (49%), digital 
encyclopaedias (41%), online institutional resources (37%) and spread-
sheets (18%), image and text edition (49%), and digital workspaces 
(43%). 

The Numécole study also explored the motives and orientations 
that underpin the relationship between digital devices and teaching. 
Generally speaking, teachers’ pedagogical practices are rather disciplinary 
(75%), although they indicate that they address cross-curricular method-
ological skills as soon as feasible (74%). Their biggest teaching challenge 
is student autonomy (77%). Individual and differentiated work prevail 
(77% and 56%) in classrooms where autonomous students are preferred 
(82%). The majority of participants also reported that they preferred 
to have student desks facing a blackboard (53%). Given this context, 
survey teachers declared that their main goals for using digital technology 
in the classroom were, in descending order of frequency: pedagogical 
differentiation, individualisation of learning, motivation, gamiﬁcation, 
media variation (colours), test preparation, and media and information 
education. 

linked 

We offer a critical method for studying the transformations caused 
to new 
the emotive, 
(Collet et al., 2021) of

by new educational media and digital mediations 
technologies. Digital acculturation helps us evaluate 
psycho-cognitive, and pragmatic changes 
teachers
the rationalisation of learning that might be revived through the use 
of AI. Numécole instructors have proposed several ways to include ICT 
in instruction. These include the didactic approach, knowledge transmis-
sion, cognitive approach (80% of respondents ranked it ﬁrst or second), 
school as intelligence development, the citizenship approach (school as a

facing mechanisation (Moeglin, 1993) and 

and students 

 
4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

51

place of socialisation), the cultural approach (school as a place of cultural 
integration), and the professional approach (school as a place to prepare 
for professional integration). 

Digital Acculturation Within the Integration 
of Digital Technologies at School 

We see acculturation as a paradigm for investigating the integration 
of digital technology in the classroom. Innovative programmes have 
been part of educational methods or dynamic initiatives, funded by the 
university, and present in teaching practices, for nearly 15 years. Students 
are stuck between contradicting injunctions and demands such as libera-
tion, autonomy, individuation, involvement, commitment, support, and 
aid. They also include reintegration and accompaniment, which are 
seen as novel and stimulating dynamics provided by digital tools and 
technology. 

We discovered in the Incubator programme that students saw school 
activities incorporating digital technology as an extension of their initia-
tives outside of the classroom. They continued to work in groups outside 
of class hours in order to develop transversal abilities. Knowing how to 
work as a team provided students with a higher level of autonomy, which 
is necessary for gaining subject-speciﬁc information. Across all observa-
tions, teachers stressed the contribution of digital tools in shaping the 
prevalent pedagogy by challenging routines and work habits and helping 
to break down existing barriers. Despite the time-consuming nature of 
technology, these tools permit the analysis of behavioural patterns and 
work habits and aid in decompartmentalisation. 

Finally, digital acculturation is a concern of gaps between the usage 
and mastery of digital technology for both instructors and learners. It 
is also a question of the growth of the school form and, more widely, 
the educational environment, as well as a component of socio-cultural 
behaviours related with the usage of digital technologies (Kabuto & 
Harmey, 2019). 

Digital acculturation is also the prospect of discovering new instruc-
tional strategies to involve students in techno creative activities (Romero

52

M. Durampart et al.

et al., 2017). It is less about utilising technology and more about discov-
ering how it may help create a deep knowledge of the United Nations’ 
2030 sustainability and development objectives jointly. In this regard, 
Faller and Heiser’s (2022) CurriQvidéos device depicts several courses of 
action by ﬁrst-time teachers who explain how digital tools (pedagogical 
robots, microcontrollers, etc.) and today’s AI (using, for example, Google 
Teachable Machine, VittaScience, or 5J5IA) could be used to engage 
students in participatory activities that preserve natural and cultural 
heritage (Heiser et al., 2021). Finally, participating in the acculturation 
process implies an interest in the unstabilised evolution of education in 
reaction to, with, and by digital technology. This interaction is pedagog-
ically led rather than assuming that the formation of digital citizenship 
would occur without deliberate involvement. 

Perspectives for Digital Acculturation 
with Regard to the Perspectives of AI 
in Learning and Education 

In this section we explore how resources and perspectives associated with 
AI issues might challenge, redirect, or redeﬁne the observed level of 
digital acculturation. Originally, a Médipath programme (Collet et al., 
2021) outside of an educational context enabled us to measure the issues 
at stake during the reorientation of medical proﬁciencies linked to time 
savings and the facilitation of expertise. A programme within higher 
education and professional learning in the naval ﬁeld (E-DEAL) envis-
ages the modalities of transfer and acculturation to industrial digital 
practices gathered around the concepts of industry 4.0. Data manage-
ment and the integration of AI are becoming training issues in their 
own right as a result of business transformations through the inte-
gration of these technologies. This research project also questions the 
representations and culture of industry players regarding the potential 
learning analytics (Lang et al., 2017; Siemens, 2013) in 
of AI and 
terms of proﬁling, individualisation of training paths, empowerment, 
and accentuation of self-learning practices for communities of learners

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

53

in vocational training. Other insights emanating from special education 
show that, while digital technologies may crystallise tensions inherent in 
the ﬁeld of social work, they are also able to support learners’ perfor-
mance, particularly in mathematics and reading (Bonjour & Daragon, 
2019). This is signiﬁcant given that many social workers ﬁnd themselves 
unable to achieve these objectives. As such, AI offers support possibilities 
for cognitive and behavioural remediation for people with speciﬁc needs 
(Hopcan et al., 2022). 

On the side of resources in educational platforms, questions oriented 
towards the evolution of organisational forms lead us to question the 
educational perspectives of AI. As educational platforms continue to 
incorporate AI technologies, there is an inherent need to reconsider 
how educators and learners adapt to and engage with the data gener-
ated by these tools. The challenges of AI in education seem to be 
oriented towards the identiﬁcation of learning dynamics and contexts 
and the proﬁling, identiﬁcation, and strategic construction of data, in 
order to initiate forms of learning centred on autonomy, self-training, 
and communities of learners in collaboration with teachers. These envi-
ronments also establish the vision of a new performance of interfaces and 
mediations, supposedly experiential and efﬁcient, in an approach that 
links the exploitation of artefacts, data, and new processes. We start from 
the challenges of translating AI into the ongoing digital acculturation 
with questions about the limits, constraints, and aporias in the educa-
tion system or on forms of learning. It is then possible to consider AI 
as a break in continuity. Its integration into school or training environ-
ments still provokes speeches, debates, and past invocations, all of which 
ﬁnd new vigour in the experiences and approaches related to AI and, at 
the same time, stimulate new issues or tensions at the heart of the world’s 
education systems.

54

M. Durampart et al.

References 

Bellas, F., Guerreiro-Santalla, S., Naya, M., & Duro, R. J. (2023). AI 
curriculum for European high schools: An embedded intelligence approach. 
International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education, 33(2), 399–426. 
Bernard, F., Beyaert-Geslin, A., Bouchardon, S., Bouillon, J.-L., Cerisier, J.-F., 
Chabert, G., Chaudiron, S., Damian-Gaillard, B., Douyère, D., Fleury, B., 
Galibert, O., Garcin-Marrou, I., Gimello-Mesplomb, F., Jacobi, D., Lafon, 
B., Legendre, B., Leleu-Merviel, S., Marchand, P., Marcon, C., & Zacklad, 
M. (2018). Dynamique des recherches en sciences de l’information et de la 
communication. 

Bonﬁls, P. (2020). Repenser l’ingénierie pédagogique à l’aune de la pandémie? 
Distances et médiations des savoirs [En ligne], Rubrique Débats 31| 2020, 
mis en ligne le 16 octobre 2020. 

Bonjour, A., & Daragon, E. (2019). Information et données ouvertes: Un bien 
commun mis à mal dans les établissements et services sociaux et médico-sociaux? 
Presses Universitaire de Nancy. 

Brown, R., & Zagefka, H. (2011). The dynamics of acculturation: An inter-
group perspective. In Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 44, 
pp. 129–184). Academic Press. 

Collet, L., Durampart, M., Heiser, L., & Picard, L. (2021). Enjeux expérien-
tiels de l’utilisation de l’IA en anatomopathologie. Communiquer. Revue de 
communication sociale et publique, 33, 26–44. 

Durampart, M. (2016). La forme scolaire en action traversée par 

l’école 
numérique. Revue française des sciences de l’information et de la communication 
(9). 

Faller, C., & Heiser, L. (2022). Croiser l’évaluation de compétences didac-
tiques et numériques sur un même support: Un déﬁ à relever dans un 
enregistrement vidéo (CurriQvidéo) en Master Enseignement Éducation et 
Formation du premier degré. Médiations et médiatisations, 9, 91–108. 

Giraudon, G., Guitton, P., Romero, M., Roy, D., & Viéville, T. (2020). 

Éducation et numérique, Déﬁs et enjeux . Inria. 

Heiser, L., Faller, C., & Bonjour, A. (2021). Rendre accessible, valoriser et 
préserver le patrimoine naturel et culturel via des pratiques technocréatives en 
enseignement moral et civique. Retour d’expérience du dispositif de formation 
des professeurs des écoles CurriqVidéo. Axe 2 séminaire IMSIC.

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

55

Hopcan, S., Polat, E., Ozturk, M. E., & Ozturk, L. (2022). Artiﬁcial 
intelligence in special education: A systematic review. Interactive Learning 
Environments, 31(10), 1–19. 

Kabuto, B., & Harmey, S. (2019). Literacy in a global context: Educational 
policy, pedagogy, and teacher education. Global Education Review, 6 (2), 1– 
4. 

Lang, C., Siemens, G., Wise, A., & Gasevic, D. (Eds.). (2017). Handbook 
of learning analytics (1st ed., p. 23). Society for Learning Analytics and 
Research (SoLAR). 

Meyer, J. G., Urbanowicz, R. J., Martin, P. C., O’Connor, K., Li, R., Peng, 
P. C., & Moore, J. H. (2023). ChatGPT and large language models in 
academia: Opportunities and challenges. BioData Mining, 16 (1), 20. 

Moeglin, P. (1993). Le paradigme de 

la machine à enseigner. Études de 

communication. langages, information, médiations, (14), 103-91. 

Pélissier, M., Dechamp, G., & Romero, M. (2018). Le tournant créatif à 
l’université: Quelles modalités? Quels enjeux? Quelles légitimités? https://archiv 
esic.ccsd.cnrs.fr/sic\_01823990 

Pélissier, M., Pérocheau, G., Siarheyeva, A. A., & Collet, L. (2013). Cultures 

numériques et trajectoires d’insertion professionnelle chez les 16-24 ans . Enquête 
ObTIC. Université de Toulon. 

Romero, M., Lille, B., & Patiño, A. (2017). Usages créatifs du numérique pour 

l’apprentissage au XXIe siècle. PUQ. 

Siemens, G. (2013). Learning analytics: The emergence of a discipline. Amer-

ican Behavioral Scientist, 57 (10), 1380–1400. 

Vassilakopoulou, P., & Hustad, E. (2023). Bridging digital divides: A literature 
review and research agenda for information systems research. Information 
Systems Frontiers, 25 (3), 955–969.

56

M. Durampart et al.

is 

licensed under 

Open Access This chapter 
the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and 
reproduction 
long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons license and indicate if changes were made. 

in any medium or format, as 

terms of 

the 

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons 
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.

