The Globus Pallidus Pars Interna in Goal-Oriented and
Routine Behaviors: Resolving a Long-Standing Paradox
Camille Piron, Daisuke Kase, Meropi Topalidou, Michel Goillandeau, Hugues

Orignac, Tho-Hai Nguyen, Nicolas P. Rougier, Thomas Boraud

To cite this version:

Camille Piron, Daisuke Kase, Meropi Topalidou, Michel Goillandeau, Hugues Orignac, et al.. The
Globus Pallidus Pars Interna in Goal-Oriented and Routine Behaviors: Resolving a Long-Standing
Paradox. Movement Disorders, 2016, ￿10.1002/mds.26542￿. ￿hal-01317968￿

HAL Id: hal-01317968

https://hal.science/hal-01317968

Submitted on 19 May 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E

The Globus Pallidus Pars Interna in Goal-Oriented and Routine
Behaviors: Resolving a Long-Standing Paradox

Camille Piron, PhD,1,2,3 Daisuke Kase, PhD,1,2,3 Meropi Topalidou, BsC,1,2,4,5,6 Michel Goillandeau,1,2 Hugues Orignac,1,2
Tho-Ha€ı N’Guyen,1,2 Nicolas Rougier, PhD,1,2,4,5,6 and Thomas Boraud, MD, PhD1,2,3,7\*

1University of Bordeaux, UMR 5293, IMN, Bordeaux, France
2CNRS, UMR 5293, IMN, Bordeaux, France
3CNRS, French-Israeli Neuroscience Lab, Bordeaux, France
4INRIA, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France
5University of Bordeaux, UMR 5800, LABRI, IPB, Talence, France
6CNRS, UMR 5800, LABRI, IPB, Talence, France
7CHU de Bordeaux, IMN Clinique, Bordeaux, France

A B S T R A C T : B a c k g r o u n d : There is an apparent
contradiction between experimental data showing that the
basal ganglia are involved in goal-oriented and routine
behaviors and clinical observations. Lesion or disruption by
deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus interna has
been used for various therapeutic purposes ranging from
the improvement of dystonia to the treatment of Tourette’s
syndrome. None of these approaches has reported any
severe impairment in goal-oriented or automatic movement.
M e t h o d : To solve this conundrum, we trained 2 mon-
keys to perform a variant of a 2-armed bandit-task (with
different reward contingencies). In the latter we alter-
trials with choices between familiar
nated blocks of
rewarded targets that elicit routine behavior and blocks
with novel pairs of targets that require an intentional
learning process.
R e s u l t s : Bilateral
inactivation of the globus pallidus
interna, by injection of muscimol, prevents animals from

new contingencies while

learning
performance
remains intact, although slower for the familiar stimuli.
We replicate in silico these data by adding lateral
competition and Hebbian learning in the cortical layer
of the theoretical model of the cortex–basal ganglia
loop that provided the framework of our experimental
approach.
C o n c l u s i o n : The basal ganglia play a critical role in
the deliberative process that underlies learning but are
not necessary for the expression of routine movements.
Our approach predicts that after pallidotomy or during
stimulation, patients should have difﬁculty with complex
learning new goal-
decision-making processes or
oriented behaviors. VC 2016 Movement Disorder Society

K e y W o r d s : primates; decision making; behavioral
task; muscimol; habits; reinforcement learning; pallidot-
omy; DBS

------------------------------------------------------------
\*Correspondence to: Thomas Boraud, Institut des Maladies
Neurod(cid:2)eg(cid:2)en(cid:2)eratives, UMR CNRS 5293, 146, rue Leo Saignat, 33 076
Bordeaux Cedex, France, E-mail: thomas.boraud@u-bordeaux.fr

Camille Piron and Daisuke Kase contributed equally to this work.

Funding agencies: The project was supported by the Agence Nationale
pour la Recherche (ANR-09-SYSC-002-03) and the Centre National pour
la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS).

Relevant conﬂicts of interests/ﬁnancial disclosures: C.P. was sup-
ported by a grant from the Ministry of the Research (14333-2012). D.K.
was supported by the Uehara Memorial Foundation and a fellowship
from the French government. M.T. was supported by a grant from Inria
(14333-2012). T.B., T.N.H., H.O., and M.G. are regular staff members of
the CNRS, and N.R. is a regular staff member of INRIA.

Received: 22 July 2015; Revised: 18 December 2015; Accepted: 23
December 2015

Published online 00 Month 2016 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/mds.26542

Introduction

In the past 20 years, a large amount of experimental
evidence has been accumulated—using behavioral, elec-
trophysiological, and functional
imaging methods—
about the involvement of the basal ganglia (BG) in goal-
oriented and routine behaviors.1-4 Oddly enough, clinical
investigations do not seem to support these data, even
though some of them have been collected in humans
using functional MRI. For instance, lesion of the internal
part of the globus pallidus (GPi) (the main output struc-
ture of the BG) or disruption of its activity by deep brain
stimulation has been used to improve dyskinesia in PD,5
alleviate dystonia,6-8 and treat Tourette’s syndrome.9

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

1

P I R O N

E T

A L

FIG. 1. Behavioral paradigm. A session consisted of at least 250 trials broken up into alternate blocks of 10 trials in routine (top) or novelty (bottom)
conditions. In each trial, 2 cues were displayed simultaneously in 2 of 4 randomly chosen possible positions on the screen. The monkey showed its
choice by moving the cursor to 1 of the cues and was rewarded by 0.3 ml of water with a predefined fixed probability that depended on the choice.
In the routine condition (top) the cues (RC1, P 5.75 and RC2, P 5.25) are ones with which the monkeys have been trained on and with which they
are familiar. This condition allows us to assess automatic/reflexive decision making. In the novelty condition (bottom), the cues (NC1 and NC2) have
the same reward probabilities (P 5.75 and P 5.25, respectively), but the pairs are changed (new shape and colors) for each session. This allows us
to assess learning capacity and deliberative goal-oriented decision making. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

None of these approaches has reported severe impair-
ment
routine movement
production.

in goal-oriented and/or

There are various identiﬁed factors for this apparent
conundrum. The most obvious is a lack of studies that
address these questions in patients with lesion or deep
brain stimulation of the GPi. A more general reason,
which contributes to the previous one, is the fact that
the experimental protocols that assess the motor role
of
the BG are usually based on simple stimulus–
response association with no ambiguity.10-13 To
address the decision mechanism itself, it is necessary
to offer more than one option. K-armed bandit
paradigms (in most cases, K 5 2) are an interesting
alternative used in experimental psychology and neu-
roeconomics. In the classical version of the task, the
subject must choose repetitively between options for
which the outcome (various probability of reward in
most of the cases) is not known. The subjects gener-
ally assess the outcomes during exploratory trials and
an error phase and then choose preferentially, but not
exclusively, the option associated with the best out-
come in an exploitation phase.14-25 This allows testing
of a deliberative decision-making process built on an
accumulation of evidence (learning). In another ver-
sion, the value is explicit and the subjects are inten-
sively pretrained. This version allows the assessment
of routine behaviors.26

To address this contradiction between theory and
observation, we designed an experimental paradigm
based on a 2-armed bandit task that combines routine
choice behavior, deliberative decision making, and pro-
cedural
learning. The experiment was carried out on
nonhuman primates with pharmacological inactivation
of the GPi.

2

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

Materials and Methods

Animals
Data were obtained from 2 female macaque mon-
keys (Macaca mulata weighing 4.9 and 5.6 kg, respec-
tively). Experiments were performed during the
daytime. Monkeys were living under a 12 h/12 h diur-
nal rhythm. Although food access was available ad
libitum, the primates were kept under water restriction
to increase their motivation to work. A veterinary
skilled in healthcare and maintenance in nonhuman
primates supervised all aspects of animal care. Experi-
mental procedures were performed in accordance with
the Council Directive of 20 October 2010 (2010/63/
UE) of the European Community. This project was
approved by the French Ethic Comity for Animal
Experimentation (50120111-A).

Behavioral Task
The primates were trained daily in the experimental
room and familiarized with the setup, which consisted
of 4 buttons placed on a board at different locations
(0 8, 90 8, 180 8, and 270 8) and a further button in a
central position, which detects contact with a mon-
key’s hand. These buttons correspond to the 4 possible
display positions of a cursor on a vertical screen. The
monkeys were seated in chairs in front of this screen
at a distance of 50 cm. The task was monitored using
Labview (National Instruments, Austin, Texas) and is
shown in Figure 1. Brieﬂy, the monkeys initiated a
trial by keeping their hands on the central button,
which induced the appearance of the cursor in the cen-
tral position of the screen. After a random delay (0.5-
1.5 s), 2 cues appeared in 2 (of 4) different positions

G P I ,

G O A L - D I R E C T E D

B E H A V I O R S

A N D

H A B I T S

determined randomly for each trial. Two experimental
conditions were alternated in blocks of 10 trials: the
Routine Condition (RC) and the Novelty Condition
(NC). In the RC, the animals had been trained (during
8 months for monkey Z and 12 months for monkey
F) on the 2 cues used (RC1 and RC2). Each cue had a
ﬁxed reward probability (PRC1 5 .75 and PRC2 5 .25).
The cue symbol and probability remained unchanged
during a session and between sessions. In the NC, 2
new cues were presented (NC1 and NC2). Each cue
had a ﬁxed probability of reward (PNC1 5 .75 and
PNC2 5 .25). The cue symbol and probability remained
the same during a session, but they changed between
sessions. Once the cues were shown, the monkeys had
a random duration time window (0.5-1.5 s) to press
the button associated with 1 cue. It moves the cursor
over the chosen cue and they have to maintain the
position for 0.5 s to 1.5 s. After this delay, the mon-
keys were rewarded (0.3 ml of water) or not according
to the reward probability of the chosen target. An
end-of-trial signal corresponding to the disappearance
of the cursor was given,
indicating to the monkeys
that the trial was ﬁnished and they could start a new
trial after an intertrial interval between 0.5 s and 1.5 s.

guided by

Surgical Procedure
Cannula guides (Plastic One, Roanoke, Virginia) were
implanted into the left and right GPi in both animals
under general anesthesia (intramuscular ketamine hydro-
chloride 10–15 mg/Kg [Panpharma, Luitr(cid:2)e, France] and
intramuscular xylazine 1.5–2.5 mg/Kg [Sigma, St. Louis,
Missouri]). Implantation was performed inside a stereo-
taxic frame (David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, Califor-
nia)
and single-unit
ventriculography
electrophysiological recordings. A ventriculographic can-
nula was introduced into the anterior horn of the lateral
ventricle and a contrast medium (Omnipaque, Nycomed,
Norway) was injected. Corrections in the position of the
GPi were performed according to the line between the
anterior commissure (AC) and the posterior commissure
(PC) line. The theoretical target was antero-posterior
(AP): 23.0 mm,
(L): 7.0 mm, depth (D):
21.2 mm.27 A linear 16-channel multielectrode array
(Alpha-Omega Engineering, Nazareth-Illit, Israel) was
lowered vertically into the brain. Extracellular single-
unit activity was recorded from 0 mm to 24 mm relative
to the AC–PC line with a wireless recording system (WS-
16, Multichannel Systems, Reutlingen, BW, Germany).
Penetration of the electrode array into the GPi was char-
acterized by an increase in the background activity with
the appearance of active neurons with a tonic ﬁring rate
(around the AC–PC line). The exit of the electrode tips
from the GPi was characterized by the absence of spike
(around 3-4 mm below the AC–PC line). When a clear
GPi signal from at least 3 contacts had been obtained,
control radiography of the position of the recording elec-

lateral

trode was performed and compared to the expected posi-
tion of the target according to the ventriculography. If
the deviation from the expected target was less than 1 mm,
the electrode was removed and a cannula guide was
inserted with a spare cannula inside so that the tip of the
cannula was superimposed on the location of the electrode
array in the control radiography (Supporting Information
Fig. S1A). Once the cannula guide was satisfactorily
placed, it was ﬁxed to the skull with dental cement.

Bilateral Inactivation of the GPi
Microinjections were delivered bilaterally 15 minutes
before a session. For both animals injections of the
GABAA agonist muscimol hydrobromide (Sigma) or
saline (NaCl 9&) were randomly assigned each day.
Muscimol was delivered at a concentration of 1 mg/ml
(dissolved in a NaCl vehicle). Injections (1 mL in each
side) were performed at a constant ﬂow rate of 0.2 ml/
min using a microinjection system (World Precision
Instrument, Sarasota, Florida). Injections were made
through a 30-gauge cannulae inserted into the 2 guide
cannulae targeting left and right GPi. Cannulas were
connected to a 25 ml Hamilton syringe by polyethylene
cannula tubing (Plastic One).

software

Data Analysis
Behavioral parameters were acquired and stored using
coded with Labview
custom interface
(National Instruments, Austin, Texas) to be analyzed
ofﬂine. Analyses were performed with Igor Pro (Wave-
metrics, Lake Oswego, Oregon). The beginning of the
session is deﬁned as the ﬁrst 25 trials, and the end of the
session as the last 25 trials. The reaction time is deﬁned
as the latency between the appearance of the 2 targets
and the release of the central button. The movement
time is deﬁned as the latency between the release of the
central button and the pressing of the target button.
Mean values of reaction times and movement times for
each session were obtained by ﬁtting the Gaussian dis-
tribution to the distributions of these periods.

Peaks of ﬁtted distributions were used as representative
values. For statistic analyses, unless stated otherwise,
pooled data are shown as the mean 6 standard deviation.
We used the multiway repeated-measures analysis of var-
iance (ANOVA) to examine the following 4 conditions:
between monkeys (monkey F or Z), periods (start or end
of the session), sessions (muscimol or saline), and experi-
mental paradigm (RC or NC). Post hoc comparisons were
made using Tukey’s test when the ANOVA showed signif-
icant differences. An unpaired t test was used to analyze
error rates. In all cases, signiﬁcance was set at P < 0.05.

Model Description
The model is based on previous work28-30 with lat-
eral competition and Hebbian learning added in the

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

3

P I R O N

E T

A L

FIG. 2. Success rates. A: Mean success rate for both monkeys across successive trials. The curve is smoothed using a moving average filter of 10 con-
secutive trials. Monkeys’ performances are almost optimal in the routine condition (gray), after saline (dashed line), or muscimol (solid line) injections. In
the novelty condition (black), although the monkeys are able to learn after saline injection (dashed), they loose this ability after the inactivation of GPi by
muscimol injection. B: Pooled monkeys’ performances during the first 25 and the last 25 trials after saline (white) and muscimol (gray) injections. Two-
way analysis of variance (monkeys 3 injection) confirmed the significance of the differences in A. Data are consistent when broken down for each animal,
as shown in C and D for monkey F and D and E for monkey Z. NC, novelty condition; RC, routine condition. \*P <.05.

cortical layer (Supporting Information Fig. S2). For a
comprehensive description,
see the Supplementary
Materials and Supporting Information Table S1.

Results

A total of 20 sessions (10 for each monkey) with
saline injections (saline) and 20 (10 for each monkey)
with muscimol injections (muscimol) were performed.
The proportion of trials in which the animals chose
the optimal target (ie, RC1 or NC1, respectively) was
deﬁned as the success rate normalized by the number
of trials in which a choice was made. When a trial
was interrupted before a choice had been made and
validated, it was counted as an error trial.

We assume that our injection encompassed a signiﬁ-
cant proportion of the GPi including motor and associa-
tive areas (see Supplementary Materials and Supporting
Information Fig. S1).

During Control Sessions, Animals Were Able
to Maximize in the Routine Condition and to
Learn New Values
The mean success rate (for the last 25 trials) was
99.4% 6 3.3% (Fig. 2A,B) (98.8% 6 0.6% for mon-
key F [Fig. 2C,D] and 100.0% 6 0.0% for monkey Z
[Fig. 2E,F]). The difference in success rate between the
2 animals was not signiﬁcant (unpaired t test). In the
NC, both animals learned progressively the difference
between the 2 cues (Fig. 2A,C,E). At the beginning of

4

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

G P I ,

G O A L - D I R E C T E D

B E H A V I O R S

A N D

H A B I T S

FIG. 3. Reaction times. A: When the data are pooled for both animals, reaction time is higher in the novelty condition (gray) when compared with
the routine condition (white) after both saline and muscimol injections. Muscimol significantly increases the reaction time in both conditions. Data
are consistent for both animals, as shown in B for monkey F and C for monkey Z. NC, novelty condition; RC, routine condition. \*P <.05.

training, their choices were random. At the end of the
session, the animals displayed a preference for NC1,
the target associated with the highest reward probabil-
ity (mean 53.8% 6 4.4% for the ﬁrst 25 trials and
93.0% 6 2.5% for the last 25 trials, Fig. 2B). There
was no signiﬁcant difference between the performance
of the 2 monkeys (48.8% 6 4.1% to 91.2% 6 4.7%
for monkey F and 58.8% 6 7.8% to 94.8% 6 2.0%
for monkey Z, 3-way ANOVA; F1,72 5 2.23, P > .05
between the 2 animals, F1,72 5 60.58, P < .01 between
the beginning and the end of sessions, F1,72 5 106.08,
P < .01 between 2 conditions, and F1,72 5 58.16,
P < .01 2-factor interaction between the beginning-end
and the 2 conditions, Fig. 2D,F).

Novelty Increases Reaction Time
Mean reaction time in NC was signiﬁcantly higher
than in the RC (respectively 447.6 ms 6 5.6 ms and
418.8 ms 6 4 ms, P < .01 unpaired t test, Fig. 3A).
There was no signiﬁcant difference between the 2 ani-
mals (457.3 ms 6 8.8 ms and 416.9 ms 6 6.7 ms for
monkey F, 437.8 ms 6 6.0 ms and 420.8 ms 6 4.9 ms
for monkey Z,
2-way ANOVA:
respectively,
F1,36 5 1.32, P > .05 between the 2 animals and
F1,36 5 18.11, P < .01 between the 2 conditions, Fig.
3B,C). Mean movement time in NC is not signiﬁcantly
modiﬁed when compared with RC (respectively 143.9
ms 6 15.2 ms and 138.4 ms 6 14.2 ms, P > .05
unpaired t test).

Error Rate Is Low in Both Conditions
The monkeys displayed different types of error, cate-
gorized as premature onset error when the animals
released the central button before the appearance of
the cues, delay error when the animal failed to choose
in the time allowed after the appearance of the cues
(0.5-1.5 s), irrelevant target when they chose a target
button that was not associated with one of the dis-
played cues, and premature target release error when
they released the chosen button before the end of the

hold delay period (0.5-1.5 s). After saline injection, in
the RC, error rates were less than 5% for each cate-
gory of error when the results from both monkeys
were combined (Fig. 4A) as well as individually for
monkey F (Fig. 4C) and monkey Z (Fig. 4E). In the
NC, error rates were similarly low (Fig. 4B,D,F).

Inactivation of the GPi Does Not
Impair Routine Behavior
After muscimol injections, the success rate did not
decrease signiﬁcantly (mean 97.0% 6 1.8%, Fig. 2A,B)
when compared with saline. This result was again con-
sistent for both monkeys (respectively 94.4% 6 3.4%
for monkey F and 99.6% 6 0.4% for monkey Z, 3-
way ANOVA: F1,72 5 3.71, P > .05 between the 2 ani-
mals, F1,72 5 0.53, P > .05 between the beginning and
the session, and F1,72 5 6.71, P < .05
the end of
between the 2 conditions, Fig. 2C-F).

Inactivation of the GPi Impairs Learning
On the other hand, in the NC, at the end of the ses-
sion, the animals did not display any preference for
either of the 2 targets after the muscimol injections
(mean 42.4% 6 4.5% to 52.0% 6 7.0%, F1,72 5 2.13,
P > .05, Fig. 2B). This behavior was consistent for both
animals (43.2% 6 6.2% to 46.8% 6 9.8% for monkey
F and 41.6% 6 7.0% to 57.2% 6 10.2% for monkey Z,
3-way ANOVA: F1,72 5 1.28, P > .05 between the 2
animals, F1,72 5 24.38, P < .01 between the beginning
the session, F1,72 5 28.11, P < .01
and the end of
between saline and muscimol, Fig. 2D,F).

injections

Muscimol

Inactivation of the GPi Increases
Reaction Time
signiﬁcantly
in
increased the reaction time in both condition RC
(452.5 ms 6 4.2 ms) and NC (495.7 ms 6 6.5 ms)
when compared with the saline injections (2-way
ANOVA: F1,76 5 47.42, P < .01 between the 2 condi-
tions and F1,76 5 61.24, P < .01 between saline and

the GPi

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

5

P I R O N

E T

A L

FIG. 4. Error rates after saline (white) and muscimol (gray) injections. A: In the routine condition, muscimol significantly increases premature target
release for both monkeys. B: In the novelty condition, muscimol significantly increases premature onset and premature target release for both mon-
keys. When both animals were considered separately, some discrepancies were noted. In monkey F, the increase in error rate is significant for pre-
mature onset error in the routine condition (C), but not in the novelty condition (D). In monkey Z, premature onset errors increase significantly only in
the novelty condition, (F) whereas premature target release errors increase in both conditions (E,F). \*P <.05.

muscimol, Fig. 3A). This was again consistent for
both animals (493.2 ms 6 8.5 ms and 445.7 ms 6 5.6
ms for monkey F and 498.2 ms 6 10.4 ms and 459.3
ms 6 5.8 ms
for monkey Z, 3-way ANOVA:
F1,72 5 0.02,
P > .05
animals,
F1,72 5 48.44, P < .01 between the 2 conditions, and
F1,72 5 62.56, P < .01 between saline and muscimol,
Fig. 3B,C). Mean movement time is not signiﬁcantly
modiﬁed in both conditions (RC: 154.6 ms 6 11.7 ms
and NC: 157.8 ms 6 12.6 ms 2-way ANOVA:
F1,76 5 4.72, P > .05).

between

the

2

Inactivation of the GPi Increases
Premature Responses

After muscimol

injections, premature onset error
increased in both RC (1.0% 6 0.2% for saline and
4.3% 6 1.8% for muscimol, P 5 .079, Fig. 4A) and
NC (0.9% 6 0.2% for saline and 4.7% 6 1.5% for
muscimol, P < .05, Fig. 4B), although this increase

6

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

was only signiﬁcant in the NC condition. There were
discrepancies between animals: monkey F showed a
signiﬁcant increase for RC only (0.5% 6 0.1% for
saline and 1.5% 6 0.4% for muscimol, P < .05, Fig.
4C), whereas monkey Z showed signiﬁcant differences
for NC (1.2% 6 0.4% for saline and 8.2% 6 2.6% for
muscimol, P < .05, Fig. 4F).

increase was

The premature target release error also increased in
both monkeys when compared with saline injections in
both RC (1.7% 6 0.6% for saline and 5.0% 6 0.9% for
muscimol, P < .01, Fig. 4A) and NC (2.0% 6 0.6% for
saline and 4.2% 6 0.5% for muscimol, P < .01, Fig. 4B).
The
for monkey Z
(1.0% 6 0.3% for saline and 3.7% 6 0.9% for musci-
mol, P < .05 in RC and 1.3% 6 0.3% for saline and
4.1% 6 0.7% for muscimol in NC, P < .01, Fig. 4E,F)
but not for monkey F (2.3% 6 1.2% for saline and
6.4% 6 1.6% for muscimol, P 5 .058 in the RC and
2.6% 6 1.0% for saline and 4.3% 6 0.8% for muscimol,

signiﬁcant

G P I ,

G O A L - D I R E C T E D

B E H A V I O R S

A N D

H A B I T S

FIG. 5. Performances of the model in the 4 conditions. A: In the routine condition, performance is optimal with or without GPi (lines are overlapped).
In the novel condition, only the intact model (with GPi) is able to learn the new cues, whereas the disabled model (without GPi) performance stays
at chance level. Each trial has been averaged over 250 experiments. B: Mean response times. Analysis of the simulations shows that reaction time
is higher in the novel condition when compared with the routine condition with active GPi. However, inactivation of the GPi significantly increases
the reaction time in both the routine and novelty conditions.

P 5 .22 in the NC, Fig. 4C,D). The other error categories
were not signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by injections.

Discussion

We have shown that the disruption of the GPi with
bilateral muscimol injections disables the capacity of
primates to learn new contingencies. It also delays the
reﬂexive choice of a known target although it does
not impair the choice itself.

The effect of GPi inactivation on behavior was origi-
nally addressed in the framework of a box-and-arrow
type model of the cortex-basal ganglia (CBG) loop31-
33 and the pathophysiology of motor akinesia and bra-
dykinesia of PD. Previous studies were carried out
with muscimol injections,13 electro-cooling methods,12
or lesion11,13 during motor control tasks. The main
observed effect was a slowing in the movement execu-
tion. Studies also showed that the GPi encodes motor
parameters such as direction tuning curves34 but that
this coding is very sensitive to the context of the
motor task.13,35 It was then demonstrated that these
motor parameters are shaped by the value of the cho-
sen option in multiple-choice decision-making proc-
esses.26 It is likely that this relationship is built—
during the learning processes—in the striatum, the
the GPi.19 Other studies
main input structure of
showed that the neural correlates of learning occurred
earlier in the BG when compared with the cortical
areas.3

Based on these observations, it has been proposed
that the CBG network is involved in the decision-
making process by comparing the value of the differ-
ent options in different dimensions (cognitive, motor,
etc.) and contributes to the learning of these different
values through reinforcement mechanisms.2,4,36 This
leads to 2 alternative hypotheses. One holds that the
BG support routine/habitual behavior and the PFC
deliberative behavior1 and the other infers that the BG

drive learning in the PFC—which in this case is de
facto the substrate of routine behavior—and become
less engaged as the task is learned.2-4,37

In the RC,

The task we developed allowed us to disentangle
these 2 theories in favor of the BG driving learning in
the PFC.
the decision reﬂects routine
behaviors and the animals almost always select the
best option. By contrast, in the NC, the animals have
to learn the new values. It takes about 100 trials
before they stabilize their behavior and choose the
best option in more than 90% of the trials. Reaction
times remain longer in NC when compared with RC,
probably because the knowledge of value is still not
completely consolidated.

Inhibition of the GPi by muscimol impairs the learn-
ing of new contingencies. This deterioration conﬁrms
that the building of neural coding of values recorded
in the BG is essential in the intentional process of rein-
forcement learning. When feedback to the cortex was
suppressed, the animals were not able to develop a
preference for any option and continued to choose
randomly.

sequential

On the other hand,

the choice of well-trained
options was not impaired. In a recent paper, Desmur-
get and Turner10 concluded that BG were not involved
in the habitual process per se because inactivation of
the GPi slowed movement, but did not impair reaction
times and the capacity to produce iteration reaches in
a pointing task. However, their task consisted of a
cue-initiated
alternative
options. In contrast to the task used in the current
study, the animals do not have to make a choice deci-
sion. This could explain why, in the present study, the
inhibition of the same area of the GPi using the same
method showed a signiﬁcant increase in reaction time
in both conditions. Therefore our study broadly con-
ﬁrms that BG are not vital for automatic movement
expression but weakens their conclusion regarding the
the BG in habitual decision
noninvolvement of

task without

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

7

P I R O N

E T

A L

making. Cortical areas need more time to perform
decision making when they lack their feedback from
BG.

We also observed that inactivation of the GPi signiﬁ-
cantly increased premature onset and premature target
release errors. This may be related to the impulsivity
that has already been observed with disruption of the
BG output, notably with deep brain stimulation of the
subthalamic nucleus.38-40

learning and habits. However,

In the past decade, we developed a theoretical model
that hypothesized that decision making emerges from
competition processes between negative and positive
feedback through the CBG loop.28,29 The model
encompasses the motor cortex, the prefrontal cortex,
and the corresponding subcortical territories: BG and
thalamus (see Supporting Information Fig. S2). Ini-
tially, the selection process is driven by noise, but as
learning progresses it becomes dependant on learned
visual cue values. This model ﬁts well with previous
correlative experimental data41 but also predicted that
suppression of the GPi outputs should impair both
reinforcement
the
model originally focused on the BG themselves and
deliberately ignored the existence of lateral competi-
tion and Hebbian learning in the cortex. We have
therefore
(Supporting
Information Fig. S2 and Supplementary Materials).
With the new conﬁguration, the model reproduces the
behavior observed in our monkeys. When GPi
is
lesioned, CBG feedback is suppressed. The model is
then unable to learn new targets, but is still able,
albeit slowly, to perform selection when the value of
the target has been learned at the cortical level by sim-
ple Hebbian mechanisms (Fig. 5). This model also
provides an explanation for the increased impulsivity
observed after disruption of the GPi feedback. In this
condition, the dynamics of the cortical network are
more sensitive to noise and more prone to divergence
without the presence of any stimulus (ie, premature
movements).

implemented these

features

Interestingly, we solved the paradox of the apparent
lack of effect on routine behavior of GPi lesion/disrup-
tion for therapeutic issues.5,6,9 Our results predict that
such patients should exhibit difﬁculties in the learning
of a new task, as they do for weathercasting task, for
example,42 while the execution of an already acquired
routine should be, at the worst, slowed. Up until now,
a single case study seems to conﬁrm our prediction. In
a PD patient who underwent unilateral left pallidot-
omy associated with subthalamotomy to relieve dyski-
nesia, it was reported the following:

speed and simple reaction
Whereas movement
times of the right arm were within the normal
range. . .two main abnormalities were found with
the right hand. (a) Implicit sequence learning in a

8

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

probabilistic serial reaction time task was absent.
(b) In a go/no-go task when the percent of no-go
trials increased, the RT superiority with the right
hand was lost.43

This single report has to be complemented with more
systematic studies using protocols similar to that used
in this study, but it opens some future and fruitful per-
spectives on the physiology and pathophysiology of
the BG.

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank A. Leblois, A. Retailleau,

Jose Obeso, and D. Hansel for discussions on the project.

References
1. Daw ND, Niv Y, Dayan P. Uncertainty-based competition between
prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control.
Nat Neurosci 2005;8:1704-1711.

2. Graybiel AM. Habits, rituals, and the evaluative brain. Annu Rev

Neurosci 2008;31:359-387.

3.

4.

Pasupathy A, Miller EK. Different time courses of learning-related
activity in the prefrontal cortex and striatum. Nature 2005;433:
873-876.

Samejima K, Doya K. Multiple representations of belief states and
action values in corticobasal ganglia loops. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2007;1104:213-228.

5. Munhoz RP, Cerasa A, Okun MS. Surgical treatment of dyskinesia

in Parkinson’s disease. Front Neurol 2014;5:65.

6. Cersosimo MG, Raina GB, Piedimonte F, Antico J, Graff P,
Micheli FE. Pallidal surgery for the treatment of primary general-
ized dystonia: long-term follow-up. Clin Neurol Neuro 2008;110:
145-150.

7. Kumar R, Dagher A, Hutchison WD, Lang AE, Lozano AM.
Globus pallidus deep brain stimulation for generalized dystonia:
clinical and PET investigation. Neurology 1999;53:871-874.

8. Hedera P. Treatment of Wilson’s disease motor complications with
deep brain stimulation. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2014;1315:16-23.

9. Welter ML, Grabli D, Vidailhet M. Deep brain stimulation for
hyperkinetics disorders: dystonia, tardive dyskinesia, and tics. Curr
Opin Neurol 2010;23:420-425.

10. Desmurget M, Turner RS. Motor sequences and the basal ganglia:

kinematics, not habits. J Neurosci 2010;30:7685-7690.

11. Horak FB, Anderson ME. Inﬂuence of globus pallidus on arm
movements in monkeys. I. Effects of kainic acid-induced lesions.
J Neurophysiol 1984;52:290-304.

12. Hore J, Vilis T. Arm movement performance during reversible basal
ganglia lesions in the monkey. Exp Brain Res 1980;39:217-228.

13. Mink JW, Thach WT. Basal ganglia motor control. III. Pallidal
ablation: normal reaction time, muscle cocontraction, and slow
movement. J Neurophysiol 1991;65:330-351.

14. Dougan JD, McSweeney FK, Farmer VA. Some parameters of
behavioral contrast and allocation of interim behavior in rats.
J Exp Anal Behav 1985;44:325-335.

15. Gilbert-Norton LB, Shahan TA, Shivik JA. Coyotes (Canis latrans)

and the matching law. Behav Process 2009;82:178-183.

16. Graft DA, Lea SE, Whitworth TL. The matching law in and within

groups of rats. J Exp Anal Behav 1977;27:183-194.

17. Herrnstein RJ. Formal properties of the matching law. J Exp Anal

Behav 1974;21:159-164.

18. Kawagoe R, Takikawa Y, Hikosaka O. Expectation of reward
modulates cognitive signals in the basal ganglia. Nat Neurosci
1998;1:411-416.

19. Laquitaine S, Piron C, Abellanas D, Loewenstein Y, Boraud T.
Complex population response of dorsal putamen neurons predicts
the ability to learn. PloS ONE 2013;8:e80683.

20. Lau B, Glimcher PW. Value representations in the primate stria-

tum during matching behavior. Neuron 2008;58:451-463.

G P I ,

G O A L - D I R E C T E D

B E H A V I O R S

A N D

H A B I T S

21. Matthews LR, Temple W. Concurrent schedule assessment of food

preference in cows. J Exp Anal Behav 1979;32:245-254.

22. Morris G, Nevet A, Arkadir D, Vaadia E, Bergman H. Midbrain
dopamine neurons encode decisions for future action. Nature neu-
roscience 2006;9:1057-1063.

23.

Palminteri S, Boraud T, Lafargue G, Dubois B, Pessiglione M.
Brain hemispheres selectively track the expected value of contralat-
eral options. J Neurosci 2009;29:13465-13472.

24. Retailleau A, Dejean C, Fourneaux B, Leinekugel X, Boraud T.
Why am I lost without dopamine?. Effects of 6-OHDA lesion on
the encoding of reward and decision process in CA3. Neurobiol
Dis 2013;59:151-164.

25.

26.

27.

Samejima K, Ueda Y, Doya K, Kimura M. Representation of
action-speciﬁc reward values in the striatum. Science 2005;310:
1337-1340.

Pasquereau B, Nadjar A, Arkadir D, et al. Shaping of motor
responses by incentive values through the basal ganglia. J Neurosci
2007;27:1176-1183.

Paxinos G, Huang XF, Toga AW. The rhesus monkey brain in ste-
reotaxic coordinates. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2000.

28. Leblois A, Boraud T, Meissner W, Bergman H, Hansel D. Com-
petition between feedback loops underlies normal and pathologi-
cal dynamics in the basal ganglia. J Neurosci 2006;26:3567-
3583.

29. Guthrie M, Leblois A, Garenne A, Boraud T. Interaction between
cognitive and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision
making: a computational study. J Neurophysiol 2013;109:3025-
3040.

30. Topalidou M, Leblois A, Boraud T, Rougier NP. A long journey
into reproducible computational neuroscience. Front Comput Neu-
rosci 2015;9:30.

31. Albin RL, Young AB, Penney JB. The functional anatomy of basal

ganglia disorders. Trends Neurosci 1989;12:366-375.

32. Alexander GA, Crutcher MD. Preparation for movement: neural
representations of intended direction in three motor areas of the
monkey. J Neurophysiol 1990;64:133-150.

33. Delong MR, Georgopoulos AP, Crutcher MD, Mitchell SJ,
Richardson RT, Alexander GE. Functional organization of the
basal ganglia: contributions of single-cell recording studies. Ciba
Found Sym 1984;107:64-82.

34. Turner RS, Anderson ME. Pallidal discharge related to the kine-
matics of reaching movements in two dimensions. J Neurophysiol
1997;77:1051-1074.

35. Brotchie P, Iansek R, Horne MK. Motor function of the monkey
globus pallidus. II. Cognitive aspects of movement and phasic neu-
ronal activity. Brain 1991;114:1685-1702.

36. Doya K. Reinforcement learning in continuous time and space.

Neural computation 2000;12:219-245.

37. Atallah HE, Lopez-Paniagua D, Rudy JW, O’Reilly RC. Separate
neural substrates for skill learning and performance in the ventral
and dorsal striatum. Nat Neurosci 2007;10:126-131.

38.

39.

Frank MJ, Samanta J, Moustafa AA, Sherman SJ. Hold your
horses: impulsivity, deep brain stimulation, and medication in par-
kinsonism. Science 2007;318:1309-1312.

Jahanshahi M, Obeso I, Baunez C, Alegre M, Krack P. Parkinson’s
disease, the subthalamic nucleus, inhibition, and impulsivity. Mov
Disord 2015;30:128-140. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
?term=Jahanshahi+M%2C+Obeso+I%2C+Baunez+C%2C+Alegre+M%
2C+Krack+P

40. Baunez C, Robbins TW. Bilateral

the subthalamic
nucleus induce multiple deﬁcits in an attentional task in rats. Eur J
Neurosci 1997;9:2086-2099.

lesions of

41. Garenne A, Pasquereau B, Guthrie M, Bioulac B, Boraud T. Basal
ganglia preferentially encode context dependent choice in a two-
armed bandit task. Front Syst Neurosci 2011;5:23.

42.

Sage JR, Anagnostaras SG, Mitchell S, et al. Analysis of probabilis-
tic classiﬁcation learning in patients with Parkinson’s disease before
and after pallidotomy surgery. Learn Mem 2003;10:226-236.

43. Obeso JA, Jahanshahi M, Alvarez L, et al. What can man do with-
out basal ganglia motor output?. The effect of combined unilateral
subthalamotomy and pallidotomy in a patient with Parkinson’s
disease. Exp Neurol 2009;220:283-292.

Supporting Data

Additional Supporting Information may be found in
the online version of this article at the publisher’s
web-site.

Movement Disorders, Vol. 00, No. 00, 2016

9

