Dual pathway architecture underlying vocal learning in
songbirds
Remya Sankar, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Remya Sankar, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier. Dual pathway architecture underlying vocal
learning in songbirds. ICDL 2022- International Conference on Development & Learning, Sep 2022,
London, United Kingdom. ￿10.1101/2022.04.02.486814￿. ￿hal-03698636￿

HAL Id: hal-03698636

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03698636

Submitted on 18 Jun 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Dual pathway architecture underlying
vocal learning in songbirds

1st Remya Sankar†
Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IMN
LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux
Talence, France
remya.sankar@inria.fr

2nd Arthur Leblois†
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IMN
UMR 5293, F-33000
Bordeaux, France
arthur.leblois@u-bordeaux.fr

3rd Nicolas P. Rougier†
Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IMN
LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux
Talence, France
nicolas.rougier@inria.fr

Abstract—Song acquisition and production in songbirds is
governed by a dedicated neural circuitry that involves two
parallel pathways: a motor pathway for the production and a
basal ganglia (BG) pathway for the acquisition. Juveniles learn
by imitating adult vocalizations and proceed by trial and error,
errors being conveyed by a dopaminergic signal. The complex
nature of the relationship between neural control and syrinx
musculature makes song learning a complicated problem to solve.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been widely hypothesized to
underlie such sensorimotor learning even though this can lead to
sub-optimal solutions under uneven contours in continuous action
spaces. In this article, we propose to re-interpret the role of a
dual pathway architecture, underlying avian vocal learning, that
helps overcome these limitations. We posit that the BG pathway
conducts exploration by inducing large daily shifts in the vocal
production while the motor pathway gradually consolidates this
exploration. This process can be understood as a modified form of
a simulated annealing process. Simulations on Gaussian perfor-
mance landscapes and a syrinx-based performance landscape are
demonstrated and compared with standard approaches. Taking
behavioral constraints into account (60 days of learning, 1000
trials per day), the model allows to reach the global optimum in
complex landscapes and thus provides a sound insight into the
role of the dual pathway architecture underlying vocal learning.

Index Terms—sensorimotor learning, reinforcement learning,

birdsong, simulated annealing

I. INTRODUCTION

The acquisition of motor skills in vertebrates is widely be-
lieved to be governed by reinforcement learning (RL) wherein
a skill is progressively learned through a series of trials and
errors [1]. Each trial in the motor space can be perceived
in the sensory space to subsequently provide an evaluation
of the performance, which will in turn generate a reward
signal to the motor system and help rectify the action. In
this view, learning to produce a given sensorimotor target
involves finding the global optimum of the reward landscape
across all possible motor commands. While previous work has
shown how neural circuitry may implement RL (direct policy
search ) through gradient ascent in the reward landscape to
maximize the cumulative reward, such a policy is deemed
to fail in the presence of local maxima. Other gradient-free

This work was partially funded by grant ANR-17-CE24-0036 and ANR-
†Equal contribution.

16-CE37-0020-01.

algorithms (e.g. simulated annealing) are more efficient in
complex uneven reward landscapes, but the mechanisms of
their implementation in brain circuits remains speculative [2].
In order to look into the mechanisms underlying sensori-
motor learning, we consider the paradigm of vocal learning
in songbirds. Based on their behavior, brain anatomy and
physiology, we hypothesise that motor learning is governed
by a dual pathway architecture that allows for an efficient
learning, mixing reinforcement learning and the regulation
of noise. The point we want
to make here is not about
optimality but rather plausibility. To do so, we adopt an
alternative to classical approaches: instead of trying to justify
a posteriori the existence of one or the other critical feature
(e.g. back-propagation) inside the brain, we start from the raw
biological facts and explore different hypotheses as to how
the neural circuitry could implement efficient vocal learning.

Juvenile songbirds learn to imitate the vocalisations of an
adult tutor through vocal learning, a form of sensorimotor
learning akin to human speech learning. During development,
the juvenile’s vocalizations progress from highly variable
(vocal babbling) to highly stereotyped and accurate imitations
of the tutor song through a trial-and-error process indicating
reinforcement learning. In zebra finches, song learning lasts
around 60 days during which a juvenile produces thousands
of vocalisations per day [3]. Vocalisations undergo changes at
multiple timescales. While rapid changes are observed across
vocalisations produced in a single day, some changes are
consolidated on a weekly timescale [3], [4]. Moreover, sleep
induces a rapid discontinuity in the produced vocalisations
with increased variability post-sleep [3]. Overnight changes,
daily fluctuations and weekly consolidations are only partially
aligned, making the song learning an erratic process [4].

Song acquisition and production is governed by a dedicated
neural circuitry that involves two parallel pathways: a cortical
(motor) pathway controlling vocal production in adults and
a basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical (BG) pathway necessary for
learning and plasticity (Figure 1a). These pathways
vocal
connect two main cortical nuclei: the premotor HVC (used as
a proper name) generating song timing [5], [6], and the robust
nucleus of the arcopallium (RA), controlling the syringeal and

biologically inspired. We demonstrate that the structural (de-
layed maturation of cortical pathway) and functional plasticity
(activity-dependent synaptic plasticity [9], [10]) observed in
a two-pathway framework together help overcome certain
shortcomings of standard RL approaches and facilitate a
convergence to the global optimum.

II. DUAL PATHWAY MODEL

The goal of the model is to implement a vocal learning
process consistent with the behavioural, physiological and
anatomical evidence collected in songbirds and thereby gain
insight into sensorimotor learning. We theoretically investigate
the interplay of the two parallel pathways within the song
system and their role in song acquisition. In this manuscript
we choose to define an abstraction based on a simplified
two dimensional (2D) representation of the dual pathway
architecture, in order to perform a more systematic study of
its properties in a reduced system.

A. Architecture

Taking inspiration from the vocal learning circuitry found
in songbirds, the model 1 has been designed as a three layered
architecture with two major parallel pathways (Figure 1b). The
first layer (HVC) operates as an input layer which indicates
the target syllable to be produced. The second layer (RA)
generates a bounded 2D motor output. The third layer mimics
the working of an avian syrinx and transforms the low-
dimensional motor output from the RA layer into a syllable
vocalisation. The HVC and RA layers are connected by two
parallel circuits inspired by the song system,
the cortical
pathway (motor pathway) which drives motor output and the
BG-thalamo-cortical circuit (RL pathway) which implements
RL and provides a tutor signal to the motor pathway (Figure 1).
The outputs of the motor and RL pathways are represented by
two scalar values, µmtr, and µrl, respectively. These values are
weighted by the influence of the two pathways, wmtr and wrl
that reflect their respective contributions to RA output (Eq 1-
2). RA output, P , is a summation of the contributions of the
motor, Pmtr, and RL, Prl, pathways (Eq 3). The output, P , is
further transformed into a syllable vocalisation, as explained
in section II-C.

Pmtr = wmtr ∗ µmtr

Prl = wrl ∗ (µrl + ξ)
P = Pmtr + Prl

(1)

(2)

(3)

B. Learning

The RL pathway, µrl, is governed by reinforcement learn-
ing, following the REINFORCE rule (Eq 6) [12]. Local
exploratory noise, ξ, is injected directly into the RL pathway,
along with the performance (or reward) prediction error, P P E
(Eq 2, 6). Performance prediction error, P P E, here corre-
sponds to the difference between the performance evaluation
at a given trial, Rtr, and the expected performance evaluation,
Rtr (Eq 5). The motor pathway, µmtr, gradually consolidates

1The scripts are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6407128.

Fig. 1. Song system in zebra finches and a simplified schema of the dual
pathway architecture. A The specialised vocal learning circuitry comprises
of two pathways: the cortical motor pathway (brown) and the BG-thalamo-
cortical pathway (grey). The cortical pathway governs song production and
includes the premotor cortical nucleus HVC and the RA. The RA projects
to downstream regions which control respiratory musculature. The parallel
BG pathway receives performance evaluation from mid-brain dopaminergic
neurons and projects to the RA. B. The dual pathway architecture inspired by
the vocal learning circuitry. The BG pathway (grey) is based on reinforcement
learning (RL) and provides a tutor signal, which is consolidated gradually
within the parallel cortical motor pathway (brown). The syrinx transforms the
combined output of these two pathways into a syllable vocalisation.

tracheal musculature in order to produce vocalisations. Direct
axonal projections along the motor pathway develop during the
early phase of song acquisition and exert a growing influence
on song production during learning. On the contrary, the early-
matured BG pathway drives initial vocalizations and variability
in the subsequent song production, but has a reduced influence
post learning [7]. The BG pathway receives a performance
evaluation signal via strong dopaminergic projections from the
midbrain and drives a motor bias that rectifies vocal errors
[8]. This motor bias is then gradually consolidated within the
cortical motor pathway. Activity-dependent synaptic plasticity
is believed to allow RL to be implemented in the BG pathway
(HVC-BG synapses [9]), and the consolidation of motor bias
within the cortical motor pathway (HVC-RA synapses [10]).
Following song acquisition, the motor pathway is capable of
producing the learnt song without the input from the BG
pathway as lesions in the BG pathway do not affect song
quality, but reduce the residual song variability.

During song learning, each timing signal in HVC must be
associated to the proper muscle configuration to produce a
given syllable, i.e. a vocalization with the desired acoustic
features. This represents a complex problem to solve in a
continuous action space, with a non-linear and redundant
relationship between RA neural activity, muscle activation
patterns and vocal acoustics [11].

Here, we propose to draw insights from the dual pathway
architecture underlying sensorimotor learning in birds, which
offers a potential solution to the aforementioned limitations of
direct gradient descent approaches. We explore the benefits
of this architecture by simulating a simplified algorithmic
implementation of the vocal learning process in the context
of different reward landscapes, both randomly generated and

Premotor NucleusMotor cortexSyrinxConsolidationExplorationMotor pathwayRLBasal Ganglia pathwayPerformance EvaluationCortical pathwayBG pathwayBGPalliumPalliumThalamusPerformance signalHVCRAArea XLMANABthe drive from the BG-led exploration, by maintaining a slow
trace of the BG contribution, Prl, and eventually learns to
produce the desired vocalisation (Eq 4).

∆µmtr = ηmtr ∗ Prl
P P E = Rtr − Rtr
∆µrl = ηrl ∗ ξ ∗ H(P P E)

(4)

(5)

(6)

where tr denotes the current trial, ηrl: learning rate within
the RL pathway, ηmtr: learning rate within the motor path-
way, ¯Rtr: running average of recently (100 trials) obtained

performance evaluations and H(x) =

(cid:40)

1 x > 0
0 x <= 0

.

We supplement the reinforcement learning implemented by
the BG pathway with two mechanisms derived from empirical
evidences underlying vocal learning in songbirds.

(i) Taking inspiration from the delayed growth of the cortical
motor pathway, we simulated the increasing influence of the
motor pathway, µmtr, alongside the decreasing influence of
the RL pathway, µrl. The maturation of the motor pathway
is modeled using an exponentially increasing contribution,
wmtr, towards the RA (Eq 1,7) while the influence of the RL
pathway, wrl is modeled using an exponentially decreasing
contribution (Eq 2,8).

(ii) Drawing on evidences from the studies of [3] showing
a daily post-sleep deterioration of song structure during the
sensorimotor period (discussed in section I), the output of
the RL pathway, µrl,
is shifted each morning. This shift
is implemented as a random jitter, ϕ (Eq 10) added to the
current BG output. These two factors are weighted as per the
daily consolidation trace, wk, determined by the mean rectified
performance prediction error experienced in the previous day
k (Eq 9).

wmtr = e−.5∗c1/tr

wrl = 1 − e−c1/tr
wk = c2 ∗ f (P P E)k
µk+1
rl = wk ∗ µk

rl + (1 − wk) ∗ ϕ

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

where ci denotes scalar constants and f (x) = xH(x).

C. Performance landscapes

The transformation of RA motor output into produced vo-
calizations, that are then compared to an auditory template of
a tutor song for performance evaluation, represents a complex
and largely unsolved problem. We therefore test the model in
two different contexts. First, we map the 2D motor space of
RA output to a 1D performance space through an arbitrary
non-monotonic function artificially denoting the performance
quality, detailed below. Second, we generate a biologically
realistic performance landscape using an artificial model of
the syrinx driven by RA output, detailed in this section.

In order to evaluate the performance of the model, we
first create continuous performance landscapes (analogous to
reward profiles), by transforming a 2D motor space to a 1D
performance evaluation: The performance landscape is a set

Fig. 2. Various types of performance landscapes. The concentric circles
show equipotential surfaces. A-C. Examples of Gaussian-based performance
landscapes with 1 global optimum and A. ‘low’ (1-5) B. ‘medium’ (10-20)
and C. ‘high’ (30-50) number of local optima. D-F. Reward contour generated
using a model of the avian syrinx [13]. D. The 50ms waves of tension and
pressure used as input to the syrinx model to generate the target syllable.
E. The spectrogram of a common zebra finch syllable chosen as the target
syllable, as generated by the model. F. The performance landscape generated
using the similarity between the target syllable and vocalisations generated
over the parameter range used in [13]. It has three global optima and several
(=11) local optima.

of Gaussian distributions, giving rise to several local optima
along with one global optimum. Each optimum is represented
by a 2D Gaussian distribution, and the performance landscape
is the maximum of these distributions. We generate several
contours by changing the number, position and widths of local
optima, awarding a maximum performance evaluation of 60%
of that of the global optimum. We categorise these set of
contours into three classes with low (1-5), medium (10-20)
and high (30-50) number of local optima. Figure 2a-c shows
an example performance landscape from each class. These
randomly generated contours provide us with explicit control
over the complexity of the performance landscape, in terms
of the number of local and global optima and their relative
heights and positions.

Further, we test the performance of the dual pathway model
with a reward contour that has been generated using a model
of the avian syrinx [13]. The 2D scalar output of the RA layer,
P , is transformed to form the input signals for the avian syrinx
model as per Eq 11, 12 (Figure 2d). The syrinx layer receives
two input signals from the RA layer, corresponding to the
air-sac pressure, α(t), and the tension of syringeal labia, β(t).
These input signals of pressure and tension lead to oscillations
in the syrinx and trachea and generate a syllable vocalisation
as a pressure wave of 50ms (T ) (Figure 2e) [13]. We construct
a spectrogram from this oscillatory pressure wave, and choose
a target syllable which is similar to a commonly-occurring
syllable in zebra finches (shown in Figure 2e). We proceed to
simulate several vocalisations over a range of input parameters

(as described in [13]), and thereby, generate a performance
landscape using a similarity metric, based on the correlation
coefficient between the generated vocalisations and the target
template. As shown in Figure 2f, the performance landscape
has three global optima, as multiple configurations of the
syrinx can produce the desired vocal output. Alongside these
global optima, there are several (11) shallow local optima
across the sensorimotor range.

α(t) = Pα + 0.04sin((T /2 + t) ∗ π ∗ 10)
β(t) = Pβ − 0.2e−200t − 10−5e200t

(11)

(12)

where the motor output of the RA layer, P ∝ [Pα, Pβ], T :
duration of the vocalisation and t ∈ [0, T ].

D. Simulation

Each simulation of the model is run over 60 days, which
is the typical duration of the sensorimotor phase for a zebra
finch, with each day consisting of 1000 trials [3]. The noise
level injected by the BG is initialised at 20% of the RA output
range. As we reach the crystallisation stage, the RL noise
level exponentially decreases to 10% of its initial value (=2%)
which is comparable to the variance observed in the pitch of
the vocalisations produced by adult birds [14].

E. Metrics

We measure the ‘terminal performance’ as the mean per-
formance evaluation obtained during the last five days of a
simulation. For the Gaussian-based performance landscape, the
global optimum has an associated reward level of 1 while all
other local optima have a maximum associated performance
evaluation of 0.6. Therefore, we consider a simulation to be
‘successful’ if it achieves a performance metric above 0.6. For
the syrinx-based performance landscape, we observed that the
highest peak outside the global optimum has an associated
performance evaluation of 0.55 while the global optima has
an associated reward of 1. Therefore, we maintain 0.6 as
the threshold above which a simulation is considered to be
successful. Finally, the ‘success rate’ of the model for a given
scenario is the proportion of successful simulations compared
to the total number of simulations.

F. Benchmark algorithms

In order to compare the performance of the dual pathway
model with established approaches, we build a framework
with a single pathway architecture, implementing variants of
RL. The single pathway injects exploratory noise, receives
performance evaluation and governs motor output. In essence,
we lesion the motor pathway allowing the RL pathway to be
in sole control of the motor output.

First, we test the performance of the single pathway frame-
work using the standard reinforcement
learning approach
(StdRL). Here, the learning rule is based on gradient descent,
akin to the former RL pathway (Eq 6). Under this scenario,
the variability of the output does not reduce over time as the
influence of the BG remains intact due to the absence of a
motor pathway. Second, we compare the performance of the

dual pathway system with a modified standard RL approach,
i.e. RL with decreasing noise (DevRL). Here, we exponentially
reduce the noise injected into the RL pathway, as learning
progresses (Eq 13).

ξtr = ξ0(1 − e−c1/tr)

(13)

where ξ0 denotes the initial noise level injected into the
pathway. Third, we compare the performance of the dual
pathway system with simulated annealing (SA), a probabilistic
technique, used to find the global optimum in discrete search
spaces [2]. This technique uses an explicit acceptance func-
tion M , to control the exploitation-exploration trade-off, or
more specifically, the probability to move to lower rewarding
positions. This acceptance probability is determined by an
exponentially-decreasing temperature parameter Γ, weighted
by the difference in performance evaluation between succes-
sive iterations ∆R (Eq 14-16).

Γtr = 1 − e−c1/tr

∆Rtr = Rcandidate − Rcurrent

M (tr) = e

∆Rtr
Γtr

(14)

(15)

(16)

where ∆Rtr refers to the difference in performance eval-
uation between a randomly chosen candidate motor output,
Rcandidate and the current motor output Rcurrent. The candi-
date motor output is chosen in a range corresponding to ηrl ∗ξ
(Eq 6) to maintain an equivalent step size with the previous
algorithms.

III. RESULTS

In this section, we test the proposed data-driven algorithm
on our simplified implementation of the dual pathway archi-
tecture. We verify the robustness of the model using different
types of reward contours and modifying exploratory parame-
ters. We, further, compare the performance of the model with
established reinforcement learning approaches.

A. Sensorimotor learning by the dual pathway model

We simulate the vocal learning process using the algorithm
described above governing the dual pathway architecture, on
a Gaussian-based performance landscape with a ‘medium’
number of local optima (17) and 1 global optimum (Figure 3).
Figure 3a shows that the motor output of the model P explores
several local optima, including the global optimum. Each day,
the RL pathway output is shifted, following which it performs
gradient ascent to find the nearest local optimum, over the
course of the day. Meanwhile, over the weekly timescale, the
motor pathway consolidates more information from the motor
outputs that are produced more often. Figure 3a-b shows that
the motor pathway does follow the model output to certain
local optima. However, it is able to successfully evade it and
eventually converge at the global optimum.

Figure 3b shows that the output is governed increasingly by
the contribution of the motor pathway as the model approaches
the global optimum. The contribution of the RL pathway
induces a strong bias and high variability in the early stages.

B. Robustness

Having observed a demonstration of the dual pathway
architecture, in this section we proceed to demonstrate the
versatility and robustness of the dual pathway framework. We
test the system under various types of scenarios and compare
the dual pathway model with a set of benchmarks using a
single pathway framework.

First, we verify the stability of the model under identical
conditions (20% initial RL noise level) on the Gaussian-
based performance landscape consisting of “medium” (10-20)
number of local optima. We simulate motor learning within
this scenario using 100 different seeds for the random number
generator resulting in varying performance landscapes and
observe that the model is successful in finding the global
optima in 76% cases (success defined as per section II-E)
(Figure 4a). Moreover, in successful simulations, the model
consistently achieves a high terminal performance (above 0.9).
Second, we verify the robustness of the model under
different types of performance landscapes. We test whether
the number of local optima has an impact on the model
performance. In order to do this, we randomly generate
100 different performance landscapes each with “low” (1-5)
and “high” (30-50) number of local optima in addition to
the global optimum. We simulate sensorimotor learning on
these performance landscapes and observe that the model is
successful in 92% and 64% cases, respectively (Figure 4a).
Further, in successful simulations, the model has a terminal
performance higher than 0.9. Thus, we observe that the model
success rate decreases with increasing number of local optima
(Figure 4a), however the terminal performance of successful
simulations is unaffected.

Third, we verify the performance of the model under
a biologically-inspired performance landscape, built using a
model of the avian syrinx (described in section II-C). Under
identical levels of BG-induced noise (20% initial RL noise),
learning using 100 different seeds for
we simulate vocal
the random number generator. We observe that the model is
successful in 92% cases and reaps a terminal performance
above 0.9 in these cases (Figure 4b). Thus, the model is
capable of sensorimotor learning under biologically realistic
performance landscapes as well.

Fourth, we test the stability of the model when higher levels
of noise are injected into the RL pathway. We simulate the
model with different higher initial levels of noise (30%, 40%
and 50%) injected into the RL pathway. We observe that the
increase in the RL noise level leads to an improvement in the
success rate of the model (Figure 4b). On the other hand, there
is a slight decrease in the terminal performance of successful
simulations with increase in initial RL noise levels.

C. Benchmarks

Now, we compare the performance of the dual pathway
architecture with that of the single pathway framework, as
described in section II-F, when governed by different learning
rules.

Fig. 3. Simulation of the dual pathway model on a Gaussian-based reward
contour with medium number of local optima (17) and 1 global optimum
using 20% initial BG variability. A The cortical motor pathway, in brown,
follows the BG-led exploration to several local optima on the performance
landscape before coverging at the global optimum. The black dots denote the
total motor output. B Initially, the contribution of the RL pathway Prl, in
grey, drives a strong bias in the motor output P , in black. As the contribution
of the motor pathway Pmtr, in brown, reaches the global optimum, the
BG contribution recedes. C The range of BG-led exploration, around the
motor pathway, shrinks with development. Each dot represents the bias driven
by the RL contribution Prl at a given trial. D Performance evaluation, in
purple, fluctuates over the coarse of learning on both daily (inset) and weekly
timescales. The daily BG consolidation trace wk, in black, determines the
shift on the following day.

As learning progresses, the target information is consolidated
into the motor pathway and the bias and variability induced
by the RL pathway recedes. This helps the model to converge
at the chosen peak. Figure 3c shows that in the initial days
of learning, BG-led exploration ranges over a large area of
the sensorimotor space around the contribution of the motor
pathway, Pmtr. Eventually, the growth of the motor pathway
curbs the influence of the RL pathway, resulting in a reduced
range of exploration as well as increased exploitation tendency.
Thus, despite the same amount of noise being injected into
the BG, the variability in the motor output decreases, leading
to the convergence of the vocal production at the position
consolidated within the cortical pathway. Progress in learning
is accompanied by a non-monotonic increase in the average
performance evaluation obtained by the model, as shown in
Figure 3d. The daily shift in the RL pathway output induces
dips in the performance evaluation, which rapidly improves
within the time course of a single day, as the RL pathway
finds the best local optimum within the exploration range.
The variability in performance evaluation reduces as learning
proceeds and as the influence of the BG-injected noise reduces
over time.

A

B

Fig. 4. Robustness and benchmarking. The grey bar and the percentage value next to it denote the success rate, i.e. the proportion of simulations with a
high terminal performance (above 0.6). The purple dots represent the terminal performance of individual simulations, i.e., the mean performance evaluation
obtained in the last five days. The opacity of the dots denotes the number of simulations that received a similar terminal performance. Yellow crossed markers
represent the median terminal performance in each scenarioo. A. Performance of the dual pathway architecture on the Gaussian-based performance landscapes
with ‘low’, ‘medium’ and ‘high’ number of local optima, at 20% initial RL noise. B. Performance of the dual pathway architecture on the syrinx-based
performance landscapes at different noise levels and comparison with benchmarks.

First, we test the performance of the single pathway frame-
work using the standard reinforcement
learning approach
(StdRL), as described in section II-F. We observe that,
over 100 simulations, each at 20% RL noise level using
the syrinx-based performance landscape, the dual pathway
framework (92% success rate, n=100, median terminal per-
formance=0.96) performs significantly better (Mann–Whitney
U=9437, p<0.01) than the single pathway framework with
StdRL (55% success rate, n=100, median terminal perfor-
mance=0.62), as shown in Figure 4b. Now, increasing the
noise level injected in the pathway does facilitate the model
to escape local optima and find the global optimum. However,
this leads to a drawback where the high variability leads to
a low terminal performance (n=100, median terminal perfor-
mance=0.4 at 50% noise) being harvested by the model post
learning (when RL noise is above 20%, terminal performance
is below 0.6 even at global optimum).

Second, in order to address the aforementioned disadvantage
of StdRL, we compare the performance of the dual pathway
system with a modified standard RL approach, RL with
decreasing noise (DevRL), as described in section II-F. Here,
we explicitly reduce the noise injected into the single pathway,
as learning progresses. We observe in Figure 4b that the dual
pathway system achieves a higher success rate than the single
pathway system with the DevRL approach at all noise levels
(Mann–Whitney U=3816, p<0.01, n=100 at 50% noise). Now,
increasing the level of noise injected into the pathway does
help resolve this issue, and drastically improves the success
rate, however this is at the cost of high vocal variability and
reduced terminal performance.

Third, we compare the performance of the dual pathway
system with a single pathway system implementing simulated

annealing [2]. When lower levels of noise are injected into the
pathway, simulated annealing performs better (71% success
rate) on the syrinx-based performance landscapes than the
standard RL (55% success rate) approach due to its superior
ability to escape local optima. With increasing noise, this
approach yields improved success rates. On the other hand,
the dual pathway framework obtains a higher success rate
(92%) as well as significantly higher terminal performance
metrics (Mann Whitney U=9306, p<0.01) than the simulated
annealing approach (71%) at 20% RL noise as well as higher
noise levels (Figure 4b).

Thus, the dual pathway framework, with its advantages and
shortcomings, provides a viable approach for sensorimotor
learning, even under low noise conditions.

IV. DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVES

Inspired from the dual pathway architecture of the vocal
learning circuitry in songbirds and by the large overnight
changes undergone by juvenile vocalizations during early
phases of learning [3], we proposed a new algorithmic im-
plementation for efficient sensorimotor learning in the face of
uneven performance landscapes with multiple optima.

In songbirds, a BG pathway drives early vocalizations and
rectifies vocal output through RL guided by a dopaminergic
signal denoting performance evaluation [15]. In parallel, a cor-
tical motor pathway consolidates BG-driven changes, utilising
activity-dependent plasticity at the HVC-RA synapses [10].
Similarly, in the model, a trace of the RL pathway output
is gradually consolidated within the motor pathway (Eq 4).
First, to reflect on the large day-to-day changes in juveniles
vocalizations that do not necessarily align with the long-
term improvement of the song [4], the initial state of the RL

pathway is reset every day with a partial copy of the previous
day’s final output (Eq 10). As synapses in the nervous system
are known to be very volatile [16], [17], the daily shift in the
BG output could reflect large overnight changes in the HVC-X
synapses, inducing a partial loss of the memory formed by RL
in the previous days. In the model, this synaptic fluctuation has
been simulated using the daily consolidation trace wk. Such
a biologically plausible mechanism for partial forgetting in
the RL pathway facilitates the exploration of a new region of
the performance landscape each day, which helps guide the
motor pathway away from the local optimum. Second, the
cortical motor pathway exhibits a delayed maturation during
sensorimotor learning [7]. It has been hypothesised that the
development of the HVC-RA synapses plays a role in reducing
the RA sensitivity towards LMAN input and thereby, gradually
suppresses the BG-induced bias in motor output [18]. Corre-
spondingly, the relative influence of the two pathways in the
model to the motor output changes over development (Eq 7, 8).
As the RL pathway contribution to the global output decreases
over development, so does the variability of the vocal output
due to the daily shift and the noise in RL pathway output, con-
sistent with the progressive decrease in song variability during
learning in songbirds [3]. Interestingly, a parallel can be drawn
between the effect of these two mechanisms and simulated
annealing, a technique used to optimise stochastic gradient
descent [2]. The daily shift in BG output facilitates escape
from local optima, akin to discrete fluctuations implemented
within simulated annealing. The change in relative influence
exerted by the two pathways plays a strikingly similar role as
temperature in simulated annealing. Indeed, the exploitation-
exploration trade-off is initially skewed towards exploration
with high trial-by-trial variability and daily changes, analogous
to the high temperature condition. As learning progresses, it
leans towards exploitation akin to low temperature scenarios
in annealing, as mentioned in [3].

It is to be noted that such a heuristic does not convey any
guarantees concerning the optimality of the solution. Other
optimization techniques used in machine learning such as
simulated annealing may succeed in pathological landscapes
that pose difficulties to the model proposed here. They are
however less biologically realistic as they rely on a long-term
maintenance of the memory of all explored options. Alterna-
tively, developmental regulation of variability in song through
sexual hormones is known in songbirds and may provide
a biologically realistic mechanism to partially overcome the
drawbacks of gradient descent (as implemented above using
DevRL) [19].

The dual pathway architecture we’ve introduced and il-
lustrated in the songbird is, in fact, a widespread cerebral
organization among vertebrates, including birds, rodents and
primates [1]. A rough description of this architecture is that
the BG provides the necessary motor variability for exploration
while the cortex (pallium for some taxa) provides stability and
late exploitation. Once acquired, skills are expressed solely by
the motor cortex without the need for the BG. This constitutes
a generic and powerful mechanism for the acquisition of

sensorimotor skills that departs from modern machine learning
techniques. Given the architectural, behavioral and physio-
logical constraints we’ve introduced, the dual pathway model
constitutes a plausible approach to sensorimotor learning that
is strongly rooted in neuroscience and behavior.

REFERENCES

[1] T. Boraud, A. Leblois, and N. P. Rougier, “A natural history of skills,”

Progress in Neurobiology, vol. 171, p. 114–124, Dec 2018.

[2] C. Tsallis and D. A. Stariolo, “Generalized simulated annealing,” Phys-
ica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 233, no. 1-2, pp.
395–406, Nov. 1996.

[3] S. Der´egnaucourt, P. P. Mitra, O. Feh´er, C. Pytte, and O. Tchernichovski,
“How sleep affects the developmental learning of bird song,” Nature, vol.
433, no. 7027, p. 710–716, Feb 2005.

[4] S. Kollmorgen, R. H. R. Hahnloser, and V. Mante, “Nearest neighbours
reveal fast and slow components of motor learning,” Nature, vol. 577,
no. 7791, pp. 526–530, Jan. 2020.

[5] R. H. R. Hahnloser, A. A. Kozhevnikov, and M. S. Fee, “Erratum:
An ultra-sparse code underlies the generation of neural sequences in
a songbird,” Nature, vol. 421, no. 6920, pp. 294–294, Jan. 2003.
[6] M. A. Long and M. S. Fee, “Using temperature to analyse temporal
dynamics in the songbird motor pathway,” Nature, vol. 456, no. 7219,
pp. 189–194, Nov. 2008.

[7] R. Mooney and M. Rao, “Waiting periods versus early innervation: the
development of axonal connections in the zebra finch song system,” The
Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 6532–6543, Nov. 1994.
[8] S. W. Bottjer and F. Johnson, “Circuits, hormones, and learning: Vocal
behavior in songbirds,” Journal of Neurobiology, vol. 33, no. 5, pp.
602–618, Nov. 1997.

[9] L. Ding, “Long-Term Potentiation in an Avian Basal Ganglia Nucleus
Essential for Vocal Learning,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 488–494, Jan. 2004.

[10] W. H. Mehaffey and A. J. Doupe, “Naturalistic stimulation drives
opposing heterosynaptic plasticity at two inputs to songbird cortex,”
Nature Neuroscience, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1272–1280, Aug. 2015.
[11] K. H. Srivastava, C. P. H. Elemans, and S. J. Sober, “Multifunctional and
Context-Dependent Control of Vocal Acoustics by Individual Muscles,”
Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 35, no. 42, pp. 14 183–14 194, Oct. 2015.
[12] R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning,” Machine Learning, vol. 8, no.
3-4, pp. 229–256, May 1992.

[13] A. Amador, Y. S. Perl, G. B. Mindlin, and D. Margoliash, “Elemental
gesture dynamics are encoded by song premotor cortical neurons,”
Nature, vol. 495, no. 7439, pp. 59–64, Feb. 2013.

[14] S. J. Sober, M. J. Wohlgemuth, and M. S. Brainard, “Central Contri-
butions to Acoustic Variation in Birdsong,” Journal of Neuroscience,
vol. 28, no. 41, pp. 10 370–10 379, Oct. 2008.

[15] V. Gadagkar, P. A. Puzerey, R. Chen, E. Baird-Daniel, A. R. Farhang,
and J. H. Goldberg, “Dopamine neurons encode performance error in
singing birds,” Science, vol. 354, no. 6317, pp. 1278–1282, Dec. 2016.
[16] A. J. Holtmaat, J. T. Trachtenberg, L. Wilbrecht, G. M. Shepherd,
X. Zhang, G. W. Knott, and K. Svoboda, “Transient and Persistent
Dendritic Spines in the Neocortex In Vivo,” Neuron, vol. 45, no. 2,
pp. 279–291, Jan. 2005.

[17] T. F. Roberts, K. A. Tschida, M. E. Klein, and R. Mooney, “Rapid
spine stabilization and synaptic enhancement at the onset of behavioural
learning,” Nature, vol. 463, no. 7283, pp. 948–952, Feb. 2010.

[18] J. Garst-Orozco, B. Babadi, and B. P.

¨Olveczky, “A neural circuit
mechanism for regulating vocal variability during song learning in zebra
finches,” eLife, vol. 3, Dec. 2014.

[19] M. Sizemore and D. J. Perkel, “Premotor synaptic plasticity limited
to the critical period for song learning,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, vol. 108, no. 42, pp. 17 492–17 497, Oct. 2011.

