ReScience

K O N R A D H I N S E N N I C O L A S P . R O U G I E R G I T H U B . R
E S C I E N C E . I O

Reproducible science is good. Replicated science is better.APRIL 4TH
2017H E A D L I N E N E W S Growth in a Time of Debt

Harvard University economists C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff have
acknowledged making a spreadsheet calculation mistake in a 2010 research
paper which has been widely cited to justify budget-cutting. But the
authors stand by their conclusion that higher government debt is
associated with slower economic growth.

Reinhart and Rogoff’s work showed average real economic growth slows (a
0.1% decline) when a country’s debt rises to more than 90% of gross
domestic product (GDP) – and this 90% ﬁgure was employed repeatedly in
political arguments over high-proﬁle austerity measures.

When that error was corrected, the “0.1% decline” data became a 2.2%
average increase in economic growth.

FAQ: Reinhart, Rogoff, and the Excel Error That Changed History
Bloomberg, Peter Coy, April 18, 2013

H E A D L I N E N E W S How the Case for Austerity Has Crumbled

In April 2013, Herndon, Ash & Pollin showed that the statistical
analyses performed on the data in the original Reinhart-Rogoff Excel
spreadsheet (which were used to support the conclusions of the paper)
were ﬂawed.

Economist Paul Krugman (Swedish National Bank’s Prize) later explained :
“What the Reinhart-Rogoff affair shows is the extent to which austerity
has been sold on false pretenses. For three years, the turn to austerity
has been presented not as a choice but as a necessity.”

Article accessed online on March 28, 2017 No corrections, no warning,
wrong results still online Cited by more than 2,000 papers

A S C I E N T I S T ’ S N I G H T M A R E Software Problem Leads to
Five Retractions

In September (2006), Swiss researchers published a paper in Nature that
cast serious doubt on a protein structure Chang’s group had described in
a 2001 Science paper.

When he investigated, Chang was horriﬁed to discover that a homemade
data-analysis program had ﬂipped two columns of data, inverting the
electron-density map from which his team had derived the ﬁnal protein
structure.

“I’ve been devastated”, Chang says. “I hope people will understand that
it was a mistake, and I’m very sorry for it.”

A Scientist’s Nightmare: Software Problem Leads to Five Retractions Greg
Miller. Science, 2006

I G N O B E L P R I Z E I N N E U R O S C I E N C E S The dead salmon
study

"When they got around to analyze the voxel data, the voxels representing
the area where the salmon’s tiny brain sat showed evidence of activity.
In the fMRI scan, it looked like the dead salmon was actually thinking
about the pictures it had been shown. The result is completely nuts —
but that’s actually exactly the point.

Bennett et al. “Neural Correlates of Interspecies Perspective Taking in
the Post-Mortem Atlantic Salmon: An Argument For Proper Multiple
Comparisons Correction” Journal of Serendipitous and Unexpected Results,
2010

Dead Salmon’s “Brain Activity” Cautions fMRI Researchers Slashdot, 2009

S C I E N C E T O D A Y Science - Broken Science

Paywalled, proprietary tools & software, non shared data, non-
reproducible, anonymous peer-review, publish or perish (alone)!

Nature 171 (1953)  Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A Structure for
Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid  J.D. WATSON & F. H. C. CRICK.

paywalled (32$)

I have heard from graduate students opting out of academia, assistant
professors afraid to come up for tenure, mid-career people wondering how
to protect their labs, and senior faculty retiring early, all because of
methodological terrorism. 

APS Observer (2016)

Methodological terrorism

A second concern held by some is that a new class of research person
will emerge — people who had nothing to do with the design and execution
of the study but use another group’s data for their own ends, possibly
stealing from the research productivity planned by the data gatherers,
or even use the data to try to disprove what the original investigators
had posited.There is concern among some front-line researchers that the
system will be taken over by what some researchers have characterized as
research parasites

The New England Journal of Medicine (2016)

research parasites

  S C I E N C E T O M O R R O W Open Science - Science

Open Access, Open Source, Open Data, Open Methodology, Open Education,
Open Peer-review, Much more fun & efﬁcient!

Original Article

Companion Notebook

A W E L L K N O W N S T O R Y Once upon a time, there was a post-doc…

Interaction between cognitive and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops
during decision making: a computational study. M. Guthrie, A. Leblois,
A. Garenne, and T. Boraud, Journal of Neurophysiology, 109, 2013

Nice paper, good results, but…

-   No public repository, no version control
-   Sources were mixing actual computation and GUI code
-   Model was split into a hundred ﬁles, main ﬁle 6,000 lines long
-   Several conﬁguration ﬁles, no data saved
-   Model description included ambiguous information

Model was hardly reproducible.

You can download our code from the URL supplied. Good luck  downloading
the only postdoc who can get it to run, though… Ian Holmes

A L O N G J O U R N E Y I N T O Reproducible computational neuroscience

Any model in Science is doomed to be proved wrong or incomplete and
replaced by a more accurate one. In the meantime, for such replacement
to happen, we have ﬁrst to make sure that models are actually
reproducible such that they can be tested, evaluated, criticized and
ultimately modiﬁed, replaced or even rejected.

This is where the shoe pinches.

If we cannot reproduce a model in the ﬁrst place, we’re doomed to
re-invent the wheel again and again, preventing us from building an
incremental computational knowledge.

My ﬁeld of research is quite different from computational neuroscience,
but I recognize the problem described in this paper very well. The core
issue has in my opinion been identiﬁed in the comment by Jan Moren:
there is no obvious way to publish complex scientiﬁc models other than
as part of simulation software.

Konrad Hinsen, 2015

404 code not foundC O L L B E R G E T A L . 2 0 1 4 Ma’am, the dog ate
my program

We describe a study into the extent to which Computer Systems
researchers share their code and data and the extent to which such code
builds. Starting with 601 papers from ACM conferences and journals, we
examine 402 papers whose results were backed by code. For 32.3% of these
papers we were able to obtain the code and build it within 30 minutes;
for 48.3% of the papers we managed to build the code, but it may have
required extra effort; for 54.0% of the papers either we managed to
build the code or the authors stated the code would build with
reasonable effort.

C O L L B E R G E T A L . 2 0 1 4 Ma’am, the dog ate my program

Reasons why code cannot be shared:

→ Versioning Problems → Code Will be Available Soon → No Intention to
Release → Programmer Left → Bad Backup Practices → Commercial Code →
Proprietary Academic Code → Industrial Lab Issues → Unavailable
Subsystems → Multiple Reasons → Intellectual Property → Research
vs. Sharing → Security and Privacy → Design Issues → Too Busy to Help

L E T ’ S P Y T H O N I Z E I T A brand new implementation

Remember? Interaction between cognitive and motor cortico-basal ganglia
loops during decision making: a computational study. M. Guthrie, A.
Leblois, A. Garenne, and T. Boraud, Journal of Neurophysiology, 109,
2013.→ 100 ﬁles, 6,000 lines of Delphi

I asked my PhD student (M. Topalidou) to write a brand new
implementation. Together, it took us three months of hard work to
replicate the model using

• Python language and numerical libraries • DANA library for intuitive
description • IPython notebook for interactive sessions

Source is now a single ﬁle of 200 readable notebook available on GitHub.
Without this replication effort, original model would have been useless
for our research.

Because of strong incentives for innovation and weak incentives for
conﬁrmation, direct replication is rarely practiced or published…
Innovative ﬁndings produce rewards of publication, employment, and
tenure; replicated ﬁndings produce a shrug.

Brian Nosek, The Reproducibility Project, 2012

WH AT DO WE D O

N E X T ?

W E A R E N O T I N T E R E S T E D I N S C I E N C E ‘cause we are
scientific publishers

— Elsevier, can I publish my replication in your journal? — Nope!

— Hi Springer, interested in replication? — Failure or success? —
Success! — Nope!

— Hello Mr Wiley, did you hear about reproducible Science? — tut…. tut….
tut…

— Dear beloved Frontiers, can you review this? — Ha ha ha…. No. 

— Well, well, well…

B E F O R E W E B E G I N

The R quintuplet (R5)

Rerunnable

Can you re-run your program ? One day, one week, one month, one year
(just kidding) apart ?

Repeatable

Can you re-run your program and get same results ? Did you save
everything, including random seed ?

Reproducible

Can someone re-run your program and get same results ? Did you save the
software stack ?

Replicable

Can someone reimplement your model and get same results ? Did you
describe everything ?

Reusable

Can someone reuse your program using different data ? Is your software
data-dependent ?

I T ’ S M O R E C O M M O N T H A N Y O U T H I N K Replications in the
wild

What is a replication?

Bob reads Alice’s paper, takes note of all model properties and then
implements the model himself using a method of his choice.

Bob conﬁrms Alice’s result by obtaining qualitatively the same results.

Alice’s model has been replicated.

Who wants to write replication?

During the course of a PhD, it is often the case that a student will try
to replicate results from the literature, possibly interacting with the
original authors.

Such replication generally lives inside the hard-drive of the computer’s
student while it would be actually useful for the whole scientiﬁc
community.

Who wants to review & publish such replication?

We do!

I N T R O D U C I N G The ReScience journal

ReScience is an open peer-reviewed journal that target any computational
research and encourage the explicit replication of already published
research promoting new and open-source implementations.

ReScience lives on github where each new implementation is made
available together with explanations (article).

Each published article is archived on Zenodo.

We redo Science !

Zenodo is a research data repository created by OpenAIRE and CERN to
provide a place for researchers to deposit datasets.

GitHub is a web-based Git repository hosting service that offers all of
the distributed version control and source code management functionality
of git as well as adding its own features.

ReScience

Reproducible science is good. Replicated science is better.

C H O I C E S H A D T O B E M A D E Why GitHub ?

GitHub offers a web-based git repository hosting service with great
speciﬁc features (issue, pull request, etc).

→ Version control → Public repositories → Transparency and veriﬁability
→ Easy exploration of new ideas

A kind of modern lab notebook for the computer scientist.

→ Popular among developers (Google, Microsoft, etc.) → Ergonomic &
efﬁcient → Free (as in beer)

But

→ Closed sources → Ran by a private company → Can close tomorrow

S U B M I S S I O N P R O C E S S Initial pull request

Replication of a result in any computational science is eligible for
submission and publication in ReScience.

1.  Fork the submission repository
2.  Write your code, data and article
3.  Submit a pull request
4.  Wait for reviews
5.  Chat with reviewers and answer questions
6.  Fix bugs and address comments
7.  Get published and get a DOI

Pull requests let you tell others about changes you’ve pushed to a
repository on GitHub. Once a pull request is opened, you can discuss and
review the potential changes with collaborators and add follow-up
commits before the changes are merged into the repository.

S U B M I S S I O N P R O C E S S Open peer-review

Editor is publicly assigned by editor-in-chief.

Reviewers are publicly invited to review (they can decline the
invitation of course)

The actual review takes place in the discussion area of the pull
request. Anybody can enter the discussion unless this discussion is
locked.

This means anybody can give advice and/or comment because this
discussion is public.

E D I T O R I A L B O A R D Editors & reviewers

Editors are contacted by editors-in-chief (K. Hinsen & N. Rougier) and
invited to join the board of editors based on their GitHub expertise and
their scientiﬁc domain.

Reviewers can freely apply to become reviewer. They only need to
indicate their scientiﬁc domain, their preferred programming language
and their ORCID number (no PhD required)

P U B L I S H I N G Markdown to Latex to PDF

Article are written in markdown and transformed into a latex ﬁle using
pandoc. The latex ﬁle processed using XeLatex.

DOI is obtained from Zenodo after having uploaded an archive of the
article, the code, the data and the notebook.

Title is the original title with a [Re] preﬁx (when replication
succeeded) and [¬Re] when replication failed.

Original author(s) and editor are informed of the success or the failure
of the replication.

ReScience

(cid:49)(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:81)(cid:96)
(cid:104)(cid:66)(cid:120)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:81)
(cid:119)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:81)

(cid:95)(cid:50)(cid:112)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:98)
(cid:34)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:81)(cid:343)(cid:105)
(cid:58)(cid:66)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:47)
(cid:74)(cid:50)(cid:63)(cid:47)(cid:66)
(cid:69)(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:98)(cid:66)

(cid:95)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:67)(cid:109)(cid:77) (cid:78)(cid:45)
(cid:107)(cid:121)(cid:82)(cid:56)
(cid:27)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:84)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:27)(cid:109)(cid:59) (cid:82)(cid:107)(cid:45)
(cid:107)(cid:121)(cid:82)(cid:56)
(cid:83)(cid:109)(cid:35)(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:63)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:27)(cid:109)(cid:59) (cid:82)(cid:57)(cid:45)
(cid:107)(cid:121)(cid:82)(cid:56)

(cid:71)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)
(cid:42)(cid:42)(cid:64)(cid:34)(cid:117)(cid:64)(cid:97)(cid:27)

(cid:42)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:59)
(cid:65)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:44)
(cid:104)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:98)
(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:112)(cid:50)
(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:105) (cid:77)(cid:81)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:59)
(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:98)
(cid:50)(cid:116)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:88)

(cid:259) (cid:42)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:50)
(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:84)(cid:81)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:118)

(cid:40)(cid:95)(cid:50)(cid:41)
(cid:65)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:77)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:59)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)
(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47) (cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:105)(cid:81)(cid:96)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:64)(cid:35)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:59)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:59)(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:28)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:98)
(cid:47)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:59)
(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:70)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:59)(cid:44) (cid:28)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:118)

(cid:74)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:66)
(cid:104)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:47)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:82)(cid:45)
(cid:107)(cid:45) (cid:106) (cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47)
(cid:76)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:28)(cid:98)
(cid:83)(cid:88)
(cid:95)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:82)(cid:45)
(cid:107)(cid:45) (cid:106)

(cid:82) (cid:65)(cid:76)(cid:95)(cid:65)(cid:27)
(cid:34)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:116)
(cid:97)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:64)(cid:80)(cid:109)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:45)
(cid:34)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:116)(cid:45)
(cid:54)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:88) (cid:107)
(cid:71)(cid:28)(cid:34)(cid:95)(cid:65)(cid:45)
(cid:108)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:251)
(cid:47)(cid:50)
(cid:34)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:116)(cid:45)
(cid:65)(cid:77)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:105)
(cid:83)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:63)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:91)(cid:109)(cid:50)
(cid:47)(cid:50)
(cid:34)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:116)(cid:45)
(cid:42)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:50)
(cid:76)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:47)(cid:50) (cid:72)(cid:28)
(cid:95)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:63)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:43)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:97)(cid:43)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:125)(cid:91)(cid:109)(cid:50)(cid:45)
(cid:108)(cid:74)(cid:95) (cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:121)(cid:121)(cid:45)
(cid:104)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:45)
(cid:54)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:88) (cid:106)
(cid:65)(cid:77)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:105)
(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:98)
(cid:74)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:98)
(cid:76)(cid:50)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:251)(cid:59)(cid:251)(cid:77)(cid:251)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:45)
(cid:108)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:251)
(cid:47)(cid:50)
(cid:34)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:116)(cid:45)
(cid:42)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:50)
(cid:76)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:47)(cid:50) (cid:72)(cid:28)
(cid:95)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:63)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:43)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:97)(cid:43)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:125)(cid:91)(cid:109)(cid:50)(cid:45)
(cid:108)(cid:74)(cid:95) (cid:56)(cid:107)(cid:78)(cid:106)(cid:45)
(cid:34)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:116)(cid:45)
(cid:54)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:88)

(cid:76)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:88)(cid:95)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:33)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:88)(cid:55)(cid:96)

(cid:27)
(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)
(cid:66)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:81)(cid:55)

(cid:185)
(cid:65)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:77)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:59)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)
(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47) (cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:105)(cid:81)(cid:96)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:64)(cid:35)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:59)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:59)(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:28)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:98)
(cid:47)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:59)

(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:70)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:59)(cid:44) (cid:28)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:118)(cid:45) (cid:74)(cid:88)
(cid:58)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:45)
(cid:27)(cid:88)
(cid:71)(cid:50)(cid:35)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:45)
(cid:27)(cid:88)
(cid:58)(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:77)(cid:50)(cid:45)
(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47) (cid:104)(cid:88)
(cid:34)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:45)
(cid:67)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:76)(cid:50)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:63)(cid:118)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:59)(cid:118)(cid:45)
(cid:82)(cid:121)(cid:78)(cid:45)
(cid:107)(cid:121)(cid:82)(cid:106)(cid:88)

(cid:65)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:109)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)

(cid:113)(cid:50)
(cid:84)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:81)(cid:98)(cid:50) (cid:28)
(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)
(cid:66)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:81)(cid:55) (cid:40)(cid:82)(cid:41)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:105)
(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:109)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:98)
(cid:28)(cid:77) (cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:98)(cid:50)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:63)(cid:64)
(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:75) (cid:66)(cid:77)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:64)(cid:35)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:59)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:59)(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:28)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:98)
(cid:35)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:50)(cid:47) (cid:81)(cid:77) (cid:28)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:77)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:84)(cid:81)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)
(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:47)(cid:64)
(cid:35)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:70)(cid:45)
(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:105)
(cid:84)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:114)(cid:28)(cid:118)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:59)(cid:63)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:75)
(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47) (cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:77)(cid:50)(cid:59)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)
(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:70)(cid:45)
(cid:63)(cid:118)(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:105)
(cid:84)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:114)(cid:28)(cid:118)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:59)(cid:63)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:98)(cid:109)(cid:35)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:28)(cid:75)(cid:66)(cid:43)
(cid:77)(cid:109)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:88)
(cid:104)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:66)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:114)(cid:28)(cid:98) (cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:50)
(cid:66)(cid:77) (cid:46)(cid:50)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:63)(cid:66)
(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:35)(cid:68)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:105)
(cid:83)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:114)(cid:63)(cid:81)(cid:98)(cid:50)
(cid:98)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:98)
(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:50)
(cid:28)(cid:112)(cid:28)(cid:66)(cid:72)(cid:28)(cid:35)(cid:72)(cid:50)
(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:91)(cid:109)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:105)
(cid:105)(cid:81) (cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:118) (cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:81)(cid:96) (cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:88)
(cid:113)(cid:50) (cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:112)(cid:50)
(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:50)
(cid:98)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:98)
(cid:105)(cid:81)
(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:28)(cid:75)(cid:35)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:109)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:50)
(cid:28)(cid:75)(cid:35)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:109)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:98)
(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47)
(cid:75)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:59)
(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:55)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:66)(cid:77) (cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:88)
(cid:104)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)
(cid:66)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:114)(cid:50)
(cid:84)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:81)(cid:98)(cid:50)
(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:98) (cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:77)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:47) (cid:66)(cid:77)
(cid:83)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:55)(cid:81)(cid:96) (cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:98)(cid:50)
(cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:59)
(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47)
(cid:42)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:55)(cid:81)(cid:96)
(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:55)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:98)
(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:50)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50) (cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:66)(cid:77)
(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:109)(cid:72)(cid:105)
(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:98)
(cid:28) (cid:35)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:43)(cid:63) (cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:107)(cid:56)(cid:121)
(cid:50)(cid:116)(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:98)
(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:96) (cid:82)(cid:107)(cid:121)
(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:98)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:105)
(cid:114)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:72)(cid:47) (cid:35)(cid:50)
(cid:105)(cid:81)(cid:81) (cid:98)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:114)
(cid:55)(cid:81)(cid:96)
(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:59)(cid:109)(cid:72)(cid:28)(cid:96)
(cid:83)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:84)(cid:105)(cid:98)(cid:88)

(cid:74)(cid:50)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:98)

(cid:113)(cid:50) (cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:84)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:81)(cid:55) (cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:72) (cid:66)(cid:77)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:50)
(cid:28)(cid:98) (cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:72)(cid:72) (cid:28)(cid:98)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:98)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:98)
(cid:81)(cid:55) (cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:72)
(cid:85)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:91)(cid:109)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:55)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:75)
(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:86)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:105) (cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:50)
(cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:50) (cid:81)(cid:55) (cid:28)
(cid:63)(cid:109)(cid:77)(cid:47)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:125)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:98) (cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47)
(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:121)(cid:121)(cid:121)
(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:50)(cid:98) (cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:46)(cid:50)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:63)(cid:66)
(cid:55)(cid:81)(cid:96) (cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:66)(cid:77)
(cid:98)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:88)
(cid:113)(cid:50) (cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:112)(cid:50)
(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:77)
(cid:109)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:35)(cid:72)(cid:50) (cid:105)(cid:81)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:66)(cid:72)(cid:50)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:66)(cid:98)
(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:66)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:64)
(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:35)(cid:109)(cid:105) (cid:114)(cid:50)
(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50) (cid:28)(cid:35)(cid:72)(cid:50)
(cid:105)(cid:81) (cid:96)(cid:109)(cid:77) (cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:84)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:112)(cid:66)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:113)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:47)(cid:81)(cid:114)(cid:98)
(cid:50)(cid:116)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:35)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:88)
(cid:113)(cid:50) (cid:55)(cid:81)(cid:109)(cid:77)(cid:47)
(cid:98)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:50)
(cid:55)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:98) (cid:66)(cid:77)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:50)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:105) (cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:112)(cid:50)
(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:77)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:66)(cid:77) (cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:66)(cid:98)
(cid:66)(cid:75)(cid:84)(cid:72)(cid:50)(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:88)
(cid:104)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:120)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:105)(cid:98)
(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:50)
(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:125)(cid:77)(cid:50)(cid:47) (cid:66)(cid:77)
(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:81)
(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:122)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:105)
(cid:84)(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:98) (cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:84)(cid:28)(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:88)
(cid:54)(cid:66)(cid:96)(cid:98)(cid:105) (cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:84)(cid:28)(cid:59)(cid:50) (cid:106)(cid:121)(cid:106)(cid:121)
(cid:85)(cid:98)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:47)
(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:109)(cid:75)(cid:77)(cid:86)
(cid:499)(cid:113)(cid:50)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:105)(cid:98)
(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50)
(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:120)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:105)(cid:81) (cid:28)
(cid:58)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:77)
(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:35)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:114)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:63) (cid:28)
(cid:75)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:77) (cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:121)(cid:88)(cid:56) (cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47) (cid:28)
(cid:97)(cid:46) (cid:81)(cid:55)
(cid:121)(cid:88)(cid:121)(cid:121)(cid:56) (cid:28)(cid:105)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50) (cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:105)
(cid:81)(cid:55) (cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:63)
(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:75)(cid:109)(cid:72)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:280)(cid:500)(cid:45)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)(cid:77) (cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:84)(cid:28)(cid:59)(cid:50) (cid:106)(cid:121)(cid:106)(cid:82)
(cid:66)(cid:77) (cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:43)(cid:28)(cid:84)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:81)(cid:55) (cid:125)(cid:59)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:50)
(cid:57)(cid:45) (cid:499)(cid:27)(cid:72)(cid:72)
(cid:98)(cid:118)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:84)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)
(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:105)(cid:98)
(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:50)
(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:66)(cid:120)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:105)(cid:81) (cid:121)(cid:88)(cid:56)(cid:500)(cid:88)
(cid:65)(cid:105)
(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:84)(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:50)(cid:47)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:28)(cid:105) (cid:35)(cid:81)(cid:105)(cid:63)
(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:125)(cid:77)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:98)
(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:50) (cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:105)
(cid:35)(cid:109)(cid:105) (cid:47)(cid:81) (cid:77)(cid:81)(cid:105)
(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:98)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50) (cid:98)(cid:28)(cid:75)(cid:50)
(cid:84)(cid:96)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:98)(cid:88)
(cid:42)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:64)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:98)(cid:118)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:84)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:43)
(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:105)(cid:98)
(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:50)
(cid:58)(cid:28)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:98)(cid:66)(cid:28)(cid:77)
(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:35)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:114)(cid:63)(cid:66)(cid:72)(cid:50) (cid:28)(cid:72)(cid:72)
(cid:81)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)(cid:96)
(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:105)(cid:98)
(cid:28)(cid:96)(cid:50) (cid:98)(cid:50)(cid:105) (cid:105)(cid:81)
(cid:121)(cid:88)(cid:56)(cid:88) (cid:54)(cid:109)(cid:96)(cid:64)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:45)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:34)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:105)(cid:120)(cid:75)(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:77)
(cid:50)(cid:91)(cid:109)(cid:28)(cid:105)(cid:66)(cid:81)(cid:77)
(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:112)(cid:50)(cid:77) (cid:66)(cid:77)
(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:50)
(cid:81)(cid:96)(cid:66)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:28)(cid:72)
(cid:84)(cid:28)(cid:84)(cid:50)(cid:96)
(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:50)(cid:98) (cid:28) (cid:88)
(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:98)(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:28)(cid:47)
(cid:81)(cid:55) (cid:89)
(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:105)(cid:114)(cid:50)(cid:50)(cid:77)
(cid:125)(cid:96)(cid:98)(cid:105) (cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:75)
(cid:28)(cid:77)(cid:47)
(cid:98)(cid:50)(cid:43)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:47)
(cid:105)(cid:50)(cid:96)(cid:75)(cid:88)

(cid:95)(cid:50)(cid:97)(cid:43)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)

(cid:96)(cid:50)(cid:98)(cid:43)(cid:66)(cid:50)(cid:77)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:88)(cid:59)(cid:66)(cid:105)(cid:63)(cid:109)(cid:35)(cid:88)(cid:66)(cid:81)

(cid:82)

(cid:27)(cid:109)(cid:59) (cid:107)(cid:121)(cid:82)(cid:56)

(cid:111)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:109)(cid:75)(cid:50) (cid:82)

(cid:65)(cid:98)(cid:98)(cid:109)(cid:50) (cid:82)

P Y T H O N T H E A L M I G H T Y The Lazarus effect

Leblois et al.  (2006)

Missing in Action  (few lines of C)

GUTHRIE et al.  (2013)

DEAD (6000 Lines of Delphi)

We redo Science !

TOPALIDOU et al.  (2015) (200 LINES of python)

PIRON et al.  (2016)

escobar et al., 2016  NALLAPU eT AL., 2016 CARREIRE ET AL., 2015

Topalidou et al.  (2017)

…

…

L A T E S T S U B M I S S I O N ( R O U G I E R , 2 0 1 7 ) [Re]
Weighted Voronoi Stippling

Adrian Secord introduced a techniques for generating stipple drawings
from grayscale images using weighted centroidal Voronoi diagrams as in
the traditional artistic technique of stippling that places small dots
of ink onto paper such that their density give the impression of tone.
The paper is not accompanied by any code and, even though the webpage of
the author points to a code archive, this one is actually nowhere to be
found.

We decided to replicate the method because it can be used for different
purpose, especially in computational biology or neuroscience where the
distribution of a cell population can be conveniently described by
shades of grey.

R E S C I E N C E . G I T H U B . I O / F A Q Frequently Asked
Questions

What if I cannot replicate a result?

Some research may not be replicable. Before declaring a research result
non-replicable, we require extra caution to be taken. In addition to
scrutiny of your submission by reviewers and editors, we will contact
the authors of the original research, and issue a challenge to the
ReScience community to spot and report (using the issue tracker) errors
in your implementation.

If no errors are found, your work will be accepted and the original
research will be declared non-replicable.

What about replication of my own work?

No. Mistakes in the implementation of research questions and methods are
often due to biases authors invariably have, consciously or not. One’s
biases will inevitably carry over to how one approaches a replication.

Perhaps even more importantly, we aim at the cross-fertilization of
research and trying to replicate the work of one’s peers might pave the
way for a future collaboration, or may give rise to new ideas as a
result of the replication effort.

R E S C I E N C E . G I T H U B . I O / F A Q Frequently Asked
Questions

What kind of research can I replicate?

Any computational research in any domain of science as long as there is
an editor from the Board who has the expertise to edit your submission.
The editorial board is growing to increase the scientiﬁc domains being
covered. If no editor is able to edit your submission, you can also
propose a guest editor (who must be willing to work with our
GitHub-based editorial processes). about replication of my own work?

I’m a student, can I submit?

Yes ! Students are strongly encouraged to submit their work. Although
the ReScience publishing model is a bit different from other academic
journals, it can give students a ﬁrst experience at peer-reviewed
scholarly publishing, including meeting standards of scientiﬁc rigor and
addressing reviewers’ comments. Publishing in ReScience is also a way to
actively contribute to open science while adding to one’s publication
record.

C O N C L U S I O N ReScience in numbers

2 editors-in-chief 9 associate editors 63 registered reviewers 9
published articles 5 articles under review 100% replication rate (strong
bias)

ISSN 2430-3658 SHERPA/RoMEO green access

Jan 20, 2017 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.254145 [Re]
Ionic Current Model of a Hypoglossal Motoneuron - Shifman, Aaron,
ReScience, volume 3, issue 1, 2017. Keywords: neuroscience, Python,
replication

Dec 9, 2016 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.200334 [Re] How
Attention Can Create Synaptic Tags for the Learning of Working Memories
in Sequential Tasks - Erwan Le Masson & Frédéric Alexandre, ReScience,
volume 2, issue 1, 2016. Keywords: neuroscience, deep learning,
associative cortex, python

Oct 18, 2016 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.161526 [Re]
Cellular and network mechanisms of slow oscillatory activity (<1 Hz) and
wave propagations in a cortical network model - Andrei Maksimov, Sacha
J. van Albada and Markus Diesmann, ReScience, volume 2, issue 1, 2016.
Keywords: Python, Neuroscience, NEST, Network Modeling, Up-Down
Oscillations, Cortex, Membrane Resistance Measurement

Oct 7, 2016 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.159545 [Re]
Robust timing and motor patterns by taming chaos in recurrent neural
networks - Julien Vitay, ReScience, volume 2, issue 1, 2016. Keywords:
Python, Recurrent neural networks, Reservoir computing, Dynamical
systems, Learning Chaos

Sep 7, 2016 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.61697 [Re]
Multiple dynamical modes of thalamic relay neurons: rhythmic bursting
and intermittent phase- locking - Georgios Detorakis, ReScience, volume
2, issue 1, 2016. Keywords: Neuroscience, Python, Conductance-based
model, Thalamic relay neurons, Intermittent phase-locking, Spindle
oscillation, Delta oscillation

Apr 22, 2016 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.50213 [Re] Chaos
in a long-term experiment with a plankton community - Owen Petchey,
Marco Plebani, Frank Pennekamp, ReScience, volume 2, issue 1, 2016.
Keywords: Ecology, Forecasting, Prediction, Chaos, Nonlinear dynamics,
Plankton community, Species interactions

Mar 7, 2016 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.47146 [Re]
Least-cost modelling on irregular landscape graphs - Joseph Stachelek,
ReScience, volume 2, issue 1, 2016. Keywords: Ecology, Least-cost path,
Delaunay triangulation, Graph Theory

Feb 10, 2016 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.45852 [Re]
Speed/accuracy trade-off between the habitual and the goal-directed
process - Guillaume Viejo, Benoît Girard & Mehdi Khamassi, ReScience,
volume 2, issue 1, 2016. Keywords: neuroscience, decision making, python

Aug 14, 2015 | Review | Repository | DOI 10.5281/zenodo.27944 [Re]
Interaction between cognitive and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops
during decision making: a computational study - Meropi Topalidou &
Nicolas P. Rougier, ReScience, volume 1, issue 1, 2015. Keywords:
neuroscience, basal ganglia, python

C O N C L U S I O N What did we learn?

We don’t need money We don’t need publishers We don’t need buzz barrier
We don’t need authorisation We don’t need impact factor We don’t need to
hide anything

We don’t need much actually… Only time & support from the scientiﬁc
community

But in the meantime we need to

– have better indexing (PubMed, Scopus, etc.) – ensure short-term
reproducibility (!) – get some incentives from upper levels

We redo Science !

W H A T ’ S N E X T ?

RE SCI ENCE X

O P E N I N G S U M M E R 2 0 1 7

W H A T ’ S N E X T ?

CO SC IENCE

A N U T O P I A F O R T O M O R R O W


