Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open Educational Resources
Frédéric Alexandre, Marie-Helene Comte, Aurélie Lagarrigue, Thierry
Viéville

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Marie-Helene Comte, Aurélie Lagarrigue, Thierry
Viéville. Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open Educational
Resources. Alex Urmeneta; Margarida Romero. Creative Applications of
Artificial Intelligence in Education., pp.35 - 43, 2024,
978-3-031-55272-4. ￿10.1007/978- 3-031-55272-4_3￿. ￿hal-04582206￿

HAL Id: hal-04582206

https://inria.hal.science/hal-04582206

Submitted on 21 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

3

Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open Educational Resources

Frédéric Alexandre, Marie-Helene Comte, Aurélie Lagarrigue, and Thierry
Viéville

Abstract This chapter discusses the creation and impact of a Massive
Open Online Course (MOOC) titled ‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence with Intel-
ligence (IAI)’ aimed at fostering a culture of AI understanding and
participation in ethical debates. The chapter ﬁrst addresses the
rationale behind developing the MOOC and the importance of citizen
training in AI, particularly concerning ethical considerations
surrounding algo- rithmic decision-making. This chapter also emphasises
the need to reevaluate human intelligence in the broader context of AI
advancements and probes the transformative nature of AI across various
domains of

F. Alexandre (B) Mnemosyne team, Inria U. Bordeaux, IMN and CNRS,
Talence, France e-mail: Frederic.Alexandre@inria.fr

M.-H. Comte

A. Lagarrigue

T. Viéville

·

·

·

M.-H. Comte e-mail: marie-helene.comte@inria.fr

A. Lagarrigue e-mail: aurelie.lagarrigue@inria.fr

T. Viéville e-mail: Thierry.Vieville@inria.fr

© The Author(s) 2024 A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative
Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education, Palgrave Studies in
Creativity and Culture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4_3

35

36

F. Alexandre et al.

life. Three perspectives are considered concerning the integration of AI
in education: adapting the learning experience, using AI as a scientiﬁc
tool for studying human learning, and critically examining its problems.
Citizen education is crucial to understanding the scientiﬁc and
technical elements of AI, especially in the context of algorithmic
decision-making ethics. The chapter’s focus on AI and citizen education
is key. It empha- sises the need for critical thinking to understand how
AI technologies affect daily life. The chapter advocates AI training to
help people under- stand how AI works and generate informed opinions
about its potential and limitations.

Keywords AI literacy · Citizen education · MOOC · Online learning ·
Ethics

Introduction

AI in education can be approached from three parallel perspectives.
First, it can be used to adapt the learning experience by designing
tools that take into account different learner characteristics or the
digital learning analytics resulting from their interaction with
systems. Such systems could have the potential to support some teachers’
tasks and allow them to intervene in more complex aspects of student
learning. Secondly, AI can be used as a scientiﬁc tool to better
understand human learning phenomena, by modelling the learner. Finally,
AI can be considered from a critical perspective. This chapter presents
these three complimen- tary, but not mutually exclusive, perspectives to
better understand the challenges of AI in an educational setting.

The latest research combining education and digital sciences makes it
possible to understand the potential and limitations of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence (AI) in the education domain. This research highlights the
potential for designing AI systems that can enhance their learning capa-
bilities and foster critical thinking (Roux et al., 2020; Viéville,
2019). Furthermore, it underscores AI’s capacity, as an instructive
entity, to understand the intricacies of human learning as well as its
ability to build more proﬁcient users of these ubiquitous tools
(Viéville & Guitton, 2020).

3 Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open …

37

AI as an Adaptive Learning Tool

Learning can be made adaptive through the use of algorithms that analyse
student learning analytics, such as quiz results or software usage data,
to adapt to individual learners by modifying difﬁculty levels or
curating content. Other adaptive systems can be made using external
cameras or brain–computer interfaces, which allow algorithms to further
analyse behaviour through sensors. This principle of adaptation is at
the heart of digital pedagogy and is often integrated alongside
gamiﬁcation strategies where the learner participates in an educational
game either solo or in collaboration with other learners (Giraudon et
al., 2020).

The KidLearn Project offers a variety of learning activities whose
multiple variants involve the addition or subtraction of whole or
decimal numbers designed and implemented by mathematical didacticians.
These variants are organised in the form of a graph of increasing
difﬁculty, respecting Vygotsky’s concept of the proximal zone of
development (Vygotsky, 1978). This concept posits that optimal learning,
as evidenced by a student’s performance over time, occurs in a zone that
is neither too challenging, which can lead to discouragement, nor too
easy, which can result in boredom. In a similar fashion, this concept
can be applied util- ising algorithms that automatically adapt to the
learner. These elements can be integrated into the algorithm, which will
automatically adapt to the learner’s progression (Oudeyer et al., 2020).

While the development of these applications remains limited, the ongoing
scientiﬁc research provides a crucial stage for initial reﬂection,
aiding in understanding the processes of knowledge acquisition and
appropriation. Indeed, to implement this adaptive approach systemati-
cally, it is essential to formalise both the knowledge and know-how, or
practices, to be taught. This necessitates the explanation and
structuring of task types and problem-solving techniques. Moreover, it
is necessary to ensure that the learning process is not burdened with
extraneous cognitive tasks unrelated to the activity itself. Adaptive
learning should also occur within a context bound by equipment
availability, personnel training, and screen usage limitations.

The positive effects of machine learning are numerous. Primarily, we
notice that adaptive learning positively enhances learner engagement, as

38

F. Alexandre et al.

diverse interactions with the content provide additional opportunities
for comprehensive understanding. Indeed, the fact that the difﬁculty
level of a learning experience can be adapted to an individual learner
makes it possible to limit or even avoid discouragement or weariness.
Also, unlike a human, the machine does not ‘judge’, which can help
maintain the learners’ engagement. However, this type of learning may
require a substantial effort on the teacher’s behalf if the design does
not take into account the student’s cognitive load. There is also the
risk that students may lose sight of the intended learning goals if the
gamiﬁcation aspects are too prominent.

Adaptive tools incorporating AI principles should allow teachers to
devote more time to students who need it most, while the rest of the
class engages in self-directed learning activities. These tools also
allow teachers to shift away from traditional knowledge transmission
methods, such as self-assessed multimedia content and automated training
exercises, and focus more on other pedagogical approaches such as
project-based learning. Compared to non-adaptive digital tools,
i.e. those without machine learning, the degree of autonomous learning
can be signiﬁ- cantly higher and more widely applicable, incorporating
comprehensive skills development paths. These tools also meet a need in
the context of distance learning situations and prompt a reevaluation of
how school work time is currently organised.

However, it is also crucial to highlight the potential misuse of this
data: the pervasive tracking and categorisation of learners, the
temptation to reduce the number of school staff, and the exacerbation of
inequali- ties related to illiteracy (Allemang et al., 2020). Attention
should also be paid to how these digital learning practices might blend
or merge with other online behaviours, such as shopping, streaming
videos, or reading, thereby inﬂuencing or altering their original
purposes.

3 Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open …

39

AI as a Model for Understanding Human Learning

learning analytics could

The ability to collect and interpret lead to improved learning, whether
these metrics are used by the learner or by the teacher for self or
external regulation (Romero, 2019). The use of learning analytics could
also make it possible to better understand human learning methods in the
long term. These learning insights can be detected using software by
measuring mouse movements or ﬁnger clicks, keyboard input, or by sensors
used in teaching situations with or without a computer (e.g. camera,
microphone, accelerometer, or GPS). Exploiting these measures requires
not only the formalisation of the learning task itself but also the
modelling of both the task and the learner, not holistically, but within
the framework of a speciﬁc task.

The use of learning analytics in digital learning environments makes it
possible to model the learning task, but also the learner’s activity
within the task. Machine learning algorithms rely on fairly
sophisticated models. These mechanisms are not necessarily conﬁned to
supervised learning, where answers are adjusted from examples provided
with the solution, but also work by ‘reinforcement’ where the system
infers causes that explain the positive (called rewards1 ) or negative
feedback during learning by building an internal model of the task to be
performed. These models are operational in that they make it possible to
create effective algorithms that adjust their parameters. One might
wonder if such models can effectively represent aspects of human
learning. In neuroscience, these computational models already represent
our brain’s functional processes as calculations or information
processing mecha- nisms at the neuronal level, thereby augmenting our
comprehension of such cognitive functions.

This area of using computer science and AI as formalisation tools
‘computational education science’ to model human (Romero et al., 2020),
is still in its infancy, but has already revealed its

learning, called

1 In the context of reinforcement learning, the concept of ‘rewards’
encompasses both positive and negative outcomes. This extends beyond the
traditional understanding of reinforcement in psychology, which
typically associates reinforcement with positive outcomes only.

40

F. Alexandre et al.

potential for the learning sciences. This is why research is carried out
in a transdisciplinary manner utilising both digital sciences and
cognitive neurosciences to explore these potentialities.

AI and Citizen Education

important to understand that

In order to ‘master’ the digital technologies in the sense of Giraudon
et al.  (2020) and understand their application (Atlan et al., 2019;
Romero, 2018), it is important to be initiated into the scientiﬁc and
technical functioning of hardware and software computing objects. In a
similar fashion, the integration of AI technologies into our daily lives
calls for the development of critical thinking in young people (Viéville
& Guitton, 2020). is It

in AI, the outcome of data processing by the algorithms is not solely
tied to their programming. The desired functions are not implemented
only using instructions, but also by providing data from which the
parameters are adjusted to obtain the desired calculation. Depending on
the degree of program autonomy, there may even be unintended
consequences as has been the case in chatbot systems that have learned,
through poor quality corpora, to produce unethical comments on social
media. Legally, it is also impor- tant to be familiar with the
implications of interacting with a ‘cobot’ or a robotic mechanism in our
daily lives. Consider, for example, a medical machine whose function
would be to help inform therapeutic decision- making in response to
different degrees of urgency. This situation, and others like it, stress
just how much the chain of responsibility between design, construction,
installation, conﬁguration, and use is inﬁnitely more complex than the
behaviour of a non-autonomous machine.

AI training should help develop the knowledge and skills necessary to
comprehend how AI works and enable individuals to develop informed
opinions on the capabilities and limitations of its use. It is in the
face of these challenges that the MOOC Artiﬁcial Intelligence with
Intelligence was created as a way to familiarise educators with computer
science in a non-technical manner and illustrate how AI can contribute
to devel- oping skills (Alexandre et al., 2021). Educational tools exist
and continue

3 Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open …

41

Fig. 3.1 An example of an unplugged activity for experimenting with a
reinforcement learning algorithm

to be developed that gradually introduce learners to the operation of
AI. Figure 3.1 shows a minimalist ‘machine’, developed by Pixees and
built by Snzzur.fr, that utilises blue and red balls to simulate the use
of algorithms in an ‘unplugged’ game. The game’s construction plans are
freely available and can be inexpensively reproduced using basic tools.
It has been established that learning computer science principles in an
‘unplugged’ way, i.e. removing oneself from machine interactions to
actively focus on the underlying concepts, makes it easier to understand
the working mechanisms of AI.

A Shift in Our Way of Thinking

Since the beginning of computing, we have seen our way of learning and
teaching evolve. For example, is it still necessary to learn calcu-
lation when calculators are readily available? While it may be essential
for understanding arithmetic operations, the need to become proﬁcient
calculators is lessened in the face of ubiquitous technologies. On the
other hand, we will always need to calculate orders of magnitude to
ensure that the calculation is relevant and that we have not made any
errors when posting or obtaining the result.

These changes in human activity are found as we automate processes that
are a matter of human intelligence. When we are content to use AI
algorithms without seeking to understand their main operating princi-
ples and their implications for our lives, we risk losing individual and
collective intelligence. We will become reliant on their mechanisms,

42

F. Alexandre et al.

thinking less for ourselves, and developing less of the critical spirit
essen- tial to the formation of autonomous and enlightened citizens.
This is the whole point of understanding how AI works (Roux et al.,
2020). If, instead, we seek to understand and master these processes,
then the possibility of delegating what, in human intelligence, is
mechanisable can offer us the chance to consciously free ourselves from
automaticities in order to devote our intelligence to higher-level goals
and more humanly important issues.

References

Alexandre, F., Becker, J., Comte, M. H., Lagarrigue, A., Liblau, R.,
Romero, M., & Viéville, T. (2021). Why, what and how to help each
citizen to understand artiﬁcial intelligence? KI-Künstliche Intelligenz,
35 (2), 191–199. Allemang, D., Gandon, F., & Hendler, J. (2020).
Semantic web for the working ontologist: Effective modeling for linked
data, RDFS, and OWL (3rd ed.). Association for Computing Machinery.
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02939606, https://doi.org/10.1145/3382097. ISBN
978-1-4503-7617-4.

Atlan, C., Archambault, J. P., Banus, O., Bardeau, F., Blandeau, A.,
Cois, A., Courbin, M., Giraudon, G., Lefèvre, S.-C., Létard, V., Masse,
B., Masseglia, F., Ninassi, B., de Quatrebarbes, S., Romero, M., Roy,
D., & Viéville, T. (2019). Apprentissage de la pensée informatique: de
la formation des enseignant·e·s à la formation de tou·te·s les
citoyen·ne·s. Revue de l’EPI. Giraudon, G., Guitton, P., Romero, M.,
Roy, D., & Viéville, T. (2020).

Éducation et numérique, Déﬁs et enjeux. Inria.

Oudeyer, P. Y., Clément, B., Roy, D., & Sauzéon, H. (2020). Projet
KidLearn: Vers une personnalisation motivante des parcours
d’apprentissage. Bulletin de l’Association Française pour l’Intelligence
Artiﬁcielle, 51–55.

Romero, M. (2018). Développer

informatique pour démystiﬁer la pensée l’intelligence artiﬁcielle. 1024,
Bulletin de la société informatique de France, 12, 67–75.

Romero, M. (2019). Analyser les apprentissages à partir des traces.
Distances et

médiations des savoirs (26).

Romero, M., Alexandre, F., Viéville, T., & Giraudon, G. (2020). LINE
sciences de cerveau de

-   Mnémosyne: Des neurosciences computationnelles aux la modélisation
    du l’éducation

computationnelles pour

3 Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open …

43

l’apprenant et du contexte de l’Association Française pour
l’Intelligence Artiﬁcielle, AFIA.

l’activité d’apprentissage. Bulletin de

Roux, L., Romero, M., Alexandre, F., & Viéville, T. (2020). Les hauts de

Otesia. Binaire.

Viéville, T. (2019). Mais comment éduquer les garçons à l’équité des
genres au niveau informatique et numérique. Éducation à la mixité: Et
les garçons? Un rêve pour les ﬁlles et les garçons. La Science.

Viéville, T., & Guitton, P. (2020). Quels sont les liens entre IA et
Éducation?

Binaire.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher
psychological

processes. Harvard University Press.

is

licensed under

the Creative Open Access This chapter Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and long as you
give appropriate reproduction credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if
changes were made.

in any medium or format, as

terms of

the

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.


