Konio Pathway: An Instinctive Visual Mechanism for Survival and Decision
Making? Carlos Carvajal, Thierry Viéville, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Carlos Carvajal, Thierry Viéville, Frédéric Alexandre. Konio Pathway: An
Instinctive Visual Mecha- nism for Survival and Decision Making?.
NeuroComp/KEOpS’12 workshop beyond the retina: from computational models
to outcomes in bioengineering. Focus on architecture and dynamics
sustaining information flows in the visuomotor system., Oct 2012,
Bordeaux, France. ￿hal-00756471￿

HAL Id: hal-00756471

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00756471

Submitted on 23 Nov 2012

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Konio Pathway: An Instinctive Visual Mechanism for Survival and
Decision Making?

Carlos Carvajal1,2,3, Thierry Vi´eville1,2 and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre1,2
1Inria, Mnemosyne Team, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research Center, 33400
Talence, France 2Universit´e de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies
Neurod´eg´en´eratives, UMR 5293, 33000 Bordeaux, France 3Universit´e de
Lorraine, Laboratoire Lorraine de Recherche en Informatique et ses
Aplications, UMR 7503, 54600 Villers-l`es-Nancy, France ∗

Abstract

Survival is one of the evolutionary priorities for every species on
Earth. It is strongly linked to making good decisions, even if these are
unconsciously made. In the visual system, interactions between conscious
and unconscious processing have been discussed, depending on the main
two information ﬂows originating from the retina: the Parvo and Magno
pathways. We consider here a possible role of the Konio pathway; less
studied and with diﬀerent characteristics, such as large receptive ﬁelds
for global complex event detection, and diﬀuse projections which may
allow to quickly inform several areas in the brain of something im-
portant present in the visual world. To test these hypotheses, we
developed a computational systemic model of the early visual system
proposing one type of Konio cells, which respond to certain spectral
patterns and change the dynamics of the rest of the system accordingly.
When examining the model’s responses to static inputs, we observe that
the system exhibits desirable reactions, together with time cost and
eﬃciency characteristics. We also discuss the implications of the
hypotheses for more complete survival and decision making processes, as
the Konio pathway may only be a foundation stone for them in terms of
evolution.

Keywords: Konio, visual mechanism, survival, decision making, pathway
inter- play

1

Introduction & Objectives

Physiologically, in the early visual system, the Parvo and Magno
pathways are better understood (Callaway, 2005) than the Konio pathway
(Hendry & Reid, 2000). Fur- thermore, the interactions between these
pathways lack understanding. The standard

∗

This work is supported by the ANR/CONICYT KEOpS project, the Lorraine
Region and the

CORTINA associated team. Corresponding author: Carlos Carvajal
(carlos.carvajal@inria.fr).

1

Magno and Parvo pathways arrive at the primary visual cortex (V1), and
the tempo- ral and parietal pathways, via the core lateral geniculate
nucleus (LGN); whilst the non-standard konio pathway projects to several
cortical areas, but at the same time to the amygdala via the superior
colliculus. The Parvo pathway is associated to details such as color and
shapes, whereas the Magno pathway is related to ﬂashing or mov- ing
images. The Konio pathway has been found in each of the Old World
primates (Hendry & Reid, 2000) and some studies (Yoonesi & Yoonesi,
2011) have proposed that it may be involved with seasonal mood changes
(Glickman, Byrne, Pineda, Hauck, & Brainard, 2006) and color consistency
mechanism (Yoonesi & Kingdom, 2008)(Paul, Saﬁr, & Tosini, 2009). Whereas
these studies propose certain roles, there are 3 Konio layers to
consider, and these studies seem to focus on the middle Konio layer,
that carries information from central blue cones to superﬁcial color
blobs in layer 3 of V1 (Hendry & Reid, 2000). Figure 1 sketches their
main features, including the matrix representation in the thalamus for
the Konio ﬂow and the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) described as a
modulator for thalamo-cortical connections. Depending on the
characteristics that we implement in our computational systemic model
for the Konio pathway, our goal is to investigate how the system changes
its dynamics in case the information signaled the presence of an
important natural element in the visual world, which might be a
predator, a possible sexual partner or food.

Figure 1: Overview of the model. An implicit hypothesis here is that the
matrix part of the pulvinar uses an analogous mechanism to that of the
Konio cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). Feedback here is
considered from cortical layer 6 of V1 and V2 with a relay at TRN for
the core pathway, and from V2 to V1 through superﬁcial layers.

2 Methods

We built our model from scratch using Python. Its architecture is
inspired from the model proposed by (Rodriguez, Whitson, & Granger,
2004)(Granger, 2006), and con-

2

siders facts from other studies, including (Callaway, 1998)(Callaway,
2004)(Callaway, 2005)(Sherman, 2007)(Masland & Martin, 2007)(Nassi &
Callaway, 2009).

Its implementation is based on three-dimensional Gabor ﬁlters for
cortical levels, on Diﬀerence of Gaussians ﬁlters for core thalamic
structures, and on a statistical analysis of oriented features for the
matrix thalamus. We only worked with horizontal and vertical
orientations for simplicity.

The input to the system corresponds to a series of black & white images
of 324x324 px, which are treated (in detail) 3 times, as a saccadic
movement is done about 3 times per second (Ballard, Hayhoe, Pool, & Rao,
1997) and humans may process complex natural images in about 120[ms]
(Thorpe, Fize, & Marlot, 1996)(VanRullen & Thorpe, 2001).

Figure 2 shows how artiﬁcial inputs are analyzed by the system
topographically by extracting patterns. The global analysis made by the
Konio system allows to choose the order of the hierarchical
decomposition, whereas the TRN inhibits information already analyzed.

The output of the system is a series of messages that represent a
certain motor output (Figure 3). They are based on the result of a
pattern recognition from the Konio, V1 and V2 information, and in how
critical this pattern is for the system.

3 Results

We have postulated that our system analyzes 3 times a frame, and that we
have diﬀerent criticality parameters for diﬀerent stimuli. One of the
ﬁrst tests that we did then was to check whether the model could extract
the patterns following a certain order given the responses from the
proposed Konio cells and how critical this pattern was for the system.
For this, we created a fake pattern that contained 3 others, which were
the ones interesting for our model. To do this we consider only the cell
activation maps1 at every level rather than to also consider the motor
output. It is validated that the system prioritizes critical patterns if
found and just then passes to less critical options if found. Already
analyzed patterns are inhibited through cortical feedback relaying at
the thalamic reticular nucleus to allow for a less costly treatment.
Figure 2 shows this process.

Another needed study was noise resistance to test the capability of the
system to demonstrate that a more developed system is needed as the
processing undertaken by the Konio cells is global and simple so it can
arrive at the desired areas without spending too much time at the
thalamus. Figure 3 shows this process, where a non- critical pattern is
used to reﬂect the idea that the system allows itself to wait for a more
detailed representation as the error at lower visual levels is too high
to recognize the pattern as present. This ﬁgure also shows that the
simulation time for the Konio mechanism proposed here is about 4 times
faster than the Parvo mechanism imple- mented, which was expected as its
goals are to communicate a simple information to several areas of the
brain, either to trigger a defensive action, or to bias the conscious
visual processing as something naturally interesting seems to be
present.

1

A map that shows cell activation rather than to show the visual
representation at that stage of

the system.

3

Figure 2: Pattern extraction and hierarchical decomposition. Using 3
konio cells of the proposed type and a fake pattern as input, that
contains the 3 interesting sub- patterns, we observe how the model
analyzes the frame one pattern at a time (T-P-U here), inhibiting what
has been already analyzed at each iteration. A The 3 interesting
patterns. B Rows: Each iteration for the single frame in A. Columns:
Input, cell mapping at V1 and V2, and the remainder after extracting the
analyzed pattern.

Figure 3: Detail & Motor output. The system recognizes the pattern and
triggers an action depending on how critical the pattern is. Top: Input
and cell activation mapping at V1 and V2. Bottom: Reduced set of
messages produced by the motor output block.

4

4 Discussion

The Konio pathway has been found in each of the Old World primates
(Hendry & Reid, 2000). It projects to higher cortical stages and to the
amygdala via the su- perior colliculus. This connection is relevant as
the superior colliculus has a role in responses to events and
emergencies (Dean, Redgrave, & Westby, 1989), and the amyg- dala
(LeDoux, 2008) is involved in several cognitive and behavioral
functions, such as attention, explicit and emotional memory, and
decision making (Gupta, Koscik, Bechara, & Tranel, 2011). We have not
yet addressed these structures nor their links, but we’re keen to study
them as the Konio pathway is just one starting point for them.

5 Conclusions and Perspectives

Our model shows that architectural and functional of characteristics of
the Konio system can bring ﬂexibility to a local and hierarchical
analysis of the perceptive world. These properties could be replicated
at higher levels of the matrix system, like in the pulvinar. It might be
also important to consider other crucial extra-cortical inputs like the
ones stemming from the superior colliculus or the amygdala.

Perspectives

• Work with natural images.

• Extend the model to higher cortical areas and the Magno pathway to
account

for motion.

• Include the path to the amygdala to exploit, e.g., higher level
decision making

processes.

• Enhance the model to further study the interactions between pathways
and the

role of the other layers of Konio cells.

• Examine other stages of the food chain: how a predator would be helped
by such

a prewired network, and the duality (being and having predators).

• Explore diﬀerent disorders (Yoonesi & Yoonesi, 2011) to which the
visual path- ways (Parvo, Magno and Konio) are related, such as multiple
sclerosis (Murav’eva, Deshkovich, & Shelepin, 2009)(Thurtell et al.,
2009), schizophrenia (Delord et al., 2006)(Butler & Javitt, 2005),
Parkinson’s (Silva et al., 2005) and Alzheimer’s (Guo, Duggan, &
Cordeiro, 2010)(Sartucci et al., 2010) disease, and many others
(Gutowski, Heron, & Scase, 1997)(Papia et al., 2010).

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the ANR/CONICYT KEOpS project, the Lorraine
Region and the CORTINA associated team.

5

References

Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pool, P. K., & Rao, R. P. N. (1997).
Deictic codes for the embodiment of cognition (with commentary).
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20 (4), 723–767.

Butler, P. D., & Javitt, D. C.

(2005). Early-stage visual processing deﬁcits in

schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 18 (2), 151–157.

Callaway, E. M. (1998). Local circuits in primary visual cortex of the
macaque monkey.

Annual Review of Neuroscience, 21 , 47–74.

Callaway, E. M. (2004). Feedforward, feedback and inhibitory connections
in primate

visual cortex. Neural Networks, 17 (5-6), 625–632.

Callaway, E. M. (2005). Structure and function of parallel pathways in
the primate

early visual system. Journal of Physiology, 566 (Pt 1), 13–19.

Dean, P., Redgrave, P., & Westby, G. W. (1989). Event or emergency? two
response systems in the mammalian superior colliculus. Trends in
Neurosciences, 12 (4), 137–147.

Delord, S., Ducato, M. G., Pins, D., Devinck, F., Thomas, P., Boucart,
M., et al. (2006). Psychophysical assessment of magno- and parvocellular
function in schizophrenia. Visual Neuroscience, 23 (3-4), 645–650.

Glickman, G., Byrne, B., Pineda, C., Hauck, W. W., & Brainard, G. C.

(2006). Light therapy for seasonal aﬀective disorder with blue
narrow-band light-emitting diodes (leds). Biological Psychiatry, 59 (6),
502–507.

Granger, R. (2006). Engines of the brain: the computational instruction
set of human

cognition. AI Magazine, 27 (2), 15–32.

Guo, L., Duggan, J., & Cordeiro, M. F. (2010). Alzheimers disease and
retinal neu-

rodegeneration. Current Alzheimer Research, 7 (1), 3–14.

Gupta, R., Koscik, T. R., Bechara, A., & Tranel, D.

(2011). The amygdala and

decision making. Neuropsychologia, 49 (4), 760–766.

Gutowski, N. J., Heron, J. R., & Scase, M. O. (1997). Early impairment
of foveal magno- and parvocellular pathways in juxta chiasmal tumours.
Vision Research, 37 (10), 1401–1408.

Hendry, S. H., & Reid, R. C. (2000). The koniocellular pathway in
primate vision.

Annual Review of Neuroscience, 23 (1), 127–153. LeDoux, J. E. (2008).
Amygdala. Scholarpedia, 3 (4), 2698. Masland, R. H., & Martin, P. R.
(2007). The unsolved mystery of vision. Current

Biology, 17 (15), R577–R582.

Murav’eva, S. V., Deshkovich, A. A., & Shelepin, Y. E. (2009). The human
magno and parvo systems and selective impairments of their functions.
Neuroscience and Behavioral Physiology, 39 (6), 535–543.

Nassi, J. J., & Callaway, E. M. (2009). Parallel processing strategies
of the primate

visual system. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 10 (5), 360–372.

Papia, M. F., Burke, M. W., Zangenehpour, S., Palmour, R. M., Ervin, F.
R., & Ptito, M. (2010). Reduced soma size of the m-neurons in the
lateral geniculate nucleus following foetal alcohol exposure in
non-human primates. Experimental Brain Research, 205 (2), 263–271.

Paul, K. N., Saﬁr, T. B., & Tosini, G. (2009). The role of retinal
photoreceptors in the

6

regulation of circadian rhythms. Reviews in Endocrine and Metabolic
Disorders, 10 (4), 271–278.

Rodriguez, A., Whitson, J., & Granger, R. (2004). Derivation and
analysis of ba- sic computational operations of thalamocortical
circuits. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16 (5), 856–877.

Sartucci, F., Borghetti, D., Bocci, T., Murri, L., Orsini, P.,
Porciatti, V., et al. (2010). Dysfunction of the magnocellular stream in
alzheimer’s disease evaluated by pat- tern electroretinograms and visual
evoked potentials. Brain Research Bulletin, 82 (3-4), 169–176.

Sherman, S. M. (2007). The thalamus is more than just a relay. Current
Opinion in

Neurobiology, 17 (4), 417–422.

Silva, M. F., Faria, P., Regateiro, F. S., Forjaz, V., Janu´ario, C.,
Freire, A., et al. (2005). Independent patterns of damage within magno-,
parvo- and koniocellular pathways in parkinsons disease. Brain: A
Journal of Neurology, 128 (Pt 10), 2260–2271.

Thorpe, S., Fize, D., & Marlot, C. (1996). Speed of processing in the
human visual

system. Nature, 381 (6582), 520–522.

Thurtell, M. J., Bala, E., Yaniglos, S. S., Rucker, J. C., Peachey, N.
S., & Leigh, R. J. (2009). Evaluation of optic neuropathy in multiple
sclerosis using low-contrast visual evoked potentials. Neurology, 73
(22), 1849–1857.

VanRullen, R., & Thorpe, S. J. (2001). The time course of visual
processing: from early perception to decision-making. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 13 (4), 454–461.

Yoonesi, A., & Kingdom, F. A. A. (2008). Comparison of sensitivity to
color changes in natural and phase-scrambled scenes. Journal of the
Optical Society of America A, 25 (3), 676–684.

Yoonesi, A., & Yoonesi, A. (2011). Functional assessment of magno, parvo
and konio- cellular pathways; current state and future clinical
applications. Journal of Oph- talmic and Vision Research, 6 (2),
119–126.

7


