Structure of receptive fields in a computational model of area 3b of
primary sensory cortex Georgios Is Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Georgios Is Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier. Structure of receptive fields
in a computational model of area 3b of primary sensory cortex. Frontiers
in Computational Neuroscience, 2014, 8, pp.26.
￿10.3389/fncom.2014.00076￿. ￿hal-01052817￿

HAL Id: hal-01052817

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01052817

Submitted on 28 Jul 2014

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Structure of Receptive Fields in a Computational Model of Area 3b of
Primary Sensory Cortex

Georgios Is. Detorakis1 and Nicolas P. Rougier2,3,4,*

1

Laboratoire des signaux et syst`emes, Sup´elec, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Bordeaux, France 3LaBRI, Universit´e de
Bordeaux, Institut Polytechnique de Bordeaux, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientiﬁque, UMR 5800, Talence, France 4Institut des Maladies
Neurod´eg´en´eratives, Universit´e de Bordeaux, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientiﬁque, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France *Corresponding author:
Nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr

Abstract

In a previous work, we introduced a computational model of area 3b which
is built upon the neural ﬁeld theory and receives input from a simpliﬁed
model of the index distal ﬁnger pad populated by a random set of touch
receptors (Merkell cells). This model has been shown to be able to
self-organize following the random stimulation of the ﬁnger pad model
and to cope, to some extent, with cortical or skin lesions. The main
hypothesis of the model is that learning of skin representations occurs
at the thalamo-cortical level while cortico-cortical connections serve a
stereotyped competition mechanism that shapes the receptive ﬁelds. To
further assess this hypothesis and the validity of the model, we repro-
duced in this article the exact experimental protocol of DiCarlo et
al. that has been used to examine the structure of receptive ﬁelds in
area 3b of the primary somatosensory cortex. Using the same analysis
toolset, the model yields consistent results, having most of the
receptive ﬁelds to contain a single region of excitation and one to
several regions of inhibition. We further proceeded our study using a
dynamic competition that deeply inﬂuences the formation of the receptive
ﬁelds. We hypothesized this dynamic competition to correspond to some
form of somatosensory attention that may help to precisely shape the
receptive ﬁelds. To test this hypothesis, we designed a protocol where
an arbitrary region of interest is delineated on the index distal ﬁnger
pad and we either (1) instructed explicitly the model to attend to this
region (simulating an attentional signal) (2) preferentially trained the
model on this region or (3) combined the two aforementioned protocols
simultaneously. Results tend to conﬁrm that dynamic competition leads to
shrunken receptive ﬁelds and its joint interaction with intensive
training promotes a massive receptive ﬁelds migration and shrinkage.

Keywords: Receptive Field — Neural Field — Somatosensory Cortex — Area
3b — SI — Computa- tional Model — Self-Organization

1

3

4 4 4 4 6 6 8 8 8 9

9 9 11 11 11

11

16

19 19 20 20 21 21 21 23

24 24 24 25 25 25

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

Contents

Introduction

Material & Methods

Model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Finger pad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Dorsal
pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . Area 3b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Gain modulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Initial training . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . Drum Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . RoI Protocol

Protocols

Results

Characterization of the RFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Training the RoI
Modulating the RoI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Joint eﬀect of training and modulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Discussion

References

Appendix A - Detailed description of the model

Tabular description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Algorithms Training protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . RoI/modulation protocol
Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Simulation details

Appendix B - Data analysis

Classical receptive ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Non-classical Receptive ﬁelds . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. Relative histogram of cRFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Cortical representation . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. Spatial event plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

Introduction

In a previous work (Detorakis and Rougier (2012)), we proposed a
computational model of the so- matosensory cortex based on neural ﬁeld
theory (Amari (1977); Bressloﬀ (2011)). This model allowed us to
investigate formation and maintenance of ordered topographic maps in the
primary somatosensory cortex during the critical period of development
(postnatal), where representations are shaped, and the post-critical
period, where representations are maintained and possibly reorganized in
face of cortical or sensory lesions or dynamic changes of the
environment. The main hypothesis of the model is that feed-forward
thalamo- cortical connections are an adequate site of plasticity while
cortico-cortical connections drive a competitive mechanism that is
central in the learning process. The model relies functionally on the
balance between lateral excitation and inhibition, allowing to widen or
sharpen the response of the model and plays a critical role in the
shaping of the receptive ﬁelds during development. This modulation of
the balance may originate from at least two distinct processes at two
diﬀerent time scales. In the long-term, neurogenesis/neuronal death and
synaptogenesis/synaptic degeneration Edelman (1987) are ontogenetic
factors that shape cortical connectivity during development as explained
in Bressler and Tognoli (2006). Synaptic density spikes during the
childhood followed by a decline during adolescence and adulthood
Feinberg et al. (1990).

To further support this hypothesis, we ﬁrst reproduced in this article
the experimental protocol of Di- Carlo et al. (1998) that has been used
to characterize the structure of receptive ﬁelds (RFs) in area 3b of
primary somatosensory cortex in three alert monkeys. This protocol is
based on the passive stimulation of the distal ﬁnger pad using a
rotating drum. This allowed the authors to show that most RFs contain a
single, central region of excitation and one or more regions of
inhibition. In this work, we adapted this protocol to our model and
validated our results using the same modiﬁed linear regression algorithm
to characterize excitatory and inhibitory components of each RF. This
helped us to tune the model and we found very consistent results using a
stereotyped proﬁle for lateral connections, resulting from a ﬁxed
balance between the amount of excitation and inhibition.

We further processed our analysis by considering the dynamic modulation
of the competition following a top-down signal that is supposed to
originate from higher order cortical areas and has been implemented as a
gain multiplication at the level of the lateral intra-cortical
connections. In the short-term perspective, such modulation allows the
model to give a sharper and stronger response to any stimulus. In the
long term perspective, the repeated modulation of the response has a
long-lasting inﬂuence onto the structure of the RFs. We hypothesized
such a modulation to represent a form of somatosensory attention
(spatial atten- tion) because such modulation has been already proposed
in the visual dimension as a possible mechanism for spatial attention,
more speciﬁcally in area V4 Salinas et al. (1997); Salinas and Sejnowski
(2001). Indeed, attention has been mostly studied in the visual system
and can be deﬁned as a mechanism that enhances the processing of
interesting (understood as behaviorally relevant) locations (spatial or
featural) while darkening the rest Posner (1980); Treisman (1988). The
ﬁrst neural correlate of that phenomenon has been discovered by Moran
and Desimone (1985) in V4 where neurons respond preferentially for a
given feature in their receptive ﬁelds. Since then, attentional eﬀects
have been found in each map of the ventral stream but also in the dorsal
stream (area MT encoding for stimulus movement, LIP representing stimuli
in a head-centered reference frame). Such attentional eﬀects have also
been identiﬁed in other modal- ities as well: auditory Fritz et
al. (2007); Picton and Hillyard (1974), motor D.A. Norman (1980) and
somatosensory to a much lesser extent, Hsiao et al. (1993). In fact,
even if the somatosensory system has been extensively studied in monkeys
and rats, the nature of attentional mechanisms and how they may aﬀect
neocortical maps of somatosensory cortices remain largely unknown.

Our main hypothesis is that the modulation of a response in area 3b may
be one of the core mechanism, even though the origin of the modulation
signal is not detailed in this article. To test this hypothesis, we
developed a speciﬁc protocol where modulation occurs only if a presented
stimulus is located within a region of interest (RoI) that corresponds
to the attended region and we compared results with a protocol where the
region of interest is speciﬁcally trained. Results tends to highlight a
prominent role of the modulation into

3

118

the shrinkage of the RFs even if only the joint interaction of training
and attention lead to maximal eﬀects.

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

Material & Methods

Model

Finger pad

We modeled a skin patch of the index distal ﬁnger pad where Merkel’s
ending complex (MEC) density is known to be the highest and to convey
information about touch and pressure, Pare et al. (2002). These
receptors have been shown to have a sustained response to any mechanical
deﬂection of the skin tissue. We thus considered a set of 256 receptors
uniformly spread over the skin patch. When a stimulus is applied at a
given position z of the skin patch, its mechanic property extends the
pressure level to nearby locations (Goodwin et al., 1995). More
formally, the response si of any receptor i located at ri is given by
the following equation:

si(z) = exp(−

1 2

kz − rik)

(1) 

It is apparent that when a stimulus is present and its distance from the
corresponding receptor tends to zero, the activity is the highest
possible. On the contrary, when there is no stimulus present, the
activity is zero. This model assumes a very simple correlation between
the distance of the receptor to the stimulus center and its level of
activity. We chose such a simple model because it eases the mathematical
analysis of the model and we are not interested in the full modeling of
the ﬁnger pad. More accurate models can be found in Srinivasan (1989)
(waterbed model), Dandekar et al. (2003) (ﬁnite elements) and in Sripati
et al. (2006b) (continuum mechanics) but we do not think using these
models would fundamentally change the properties of our model (see ﬁgure
1 for a comparison of the waterbed and Gaussian surface deﬂection
models) since the set of 256 receptors encode a two-dimensional quantity
that corresponds to the position of the stimulus.

132

Dorsal pathway

The dorsal column-medial lemniscus (DCML) pathway is the major aﬀerent
pathway for mechanosensory information and mediate tactile
discrimination as well as proprioception (Purves et al., 2001). There
exist several relays along this path (dorsal root ganglion, gracile and
cuneate nuclei of caudal medulla and ventral posterior lateral nucleus
of the thalamus) that convey information from ﬁrst order neurons up to
the somatosensory cortex. We modeled this complex pathway as a direct
transformation of the MEC activity corresponding to the mean distance
between receptors activity and the corresponding feed-forward weights.
Consequently, and considering a stimulus at position z on the skin
patch, the input I(x, z, t) received by a neuron x of SI is given by
equation:

I(x, z, t) = 1 −

1 n

n

Xi=0

|si(z) − wi

f (x, t)|

(2) 

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

where i designates a speciﬁc skin receptor and wi f (x, t) is the
feed-forward weight at time t linking receptor i to neuron x. This
equation implies that any SI neuron receives input from all the skin
receptors. From a neurophysiological point of view, such an assumption
is valid to the extent that we considered only a small skin patch on
distal ﬁnger pad. The transformation itself can be considered as the
complement of the normalized distance between the set of receptors and
the set of feed-forward weights. Such transformation is maximal (I(x, z)
= 1) for a given stimulus z if ∀i, si(z) = wi f (x, t). This is true
because equation (1) implies that the maximum amplitude of a stimulus is
equal to one and we assumed that the feed-forward weights, wf , are
bound between 0 and 1 and therefore the maximal value of I(x, z) = 1 and
the minimum value can be I(x, z) = 0.

4

A

Receptive Field Surface

B

C

40 mm

D

)

m m

( n o i t c e l f e d e c a f r u S

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

Waterbed model

5 mm

1.0 mm

Gaussian model

E

)

m m

( n o i t c e l f e d e c a f r u S

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

0.01

0.1 1.0 Distance from the load (mm)

L/3

L=10

-2.0

0.01

0.1 1.0 Distance from the load (mm)

L/3

L=10

Figure 1: Skin model. The ﬁnger pad skin patch is approximately of size
25mm2, using a receptor density of 10/mm2. It has been modeled as a
planar surface and we considered 256 MEC’s that are arranged in a
regular grid over the whole surface with a position jitter of 5%. This
results in a quasi-uniform distribution consistent with actual
distribution of MEC as reported in Pare et al. (2002). A. Schematic
diagram of the hand. B. Position and relative size of the skin patch. C.
Magniﬁcation of the skin patch showing MECs distribution. D. Waterbed
surface deﬂection model from Srinivasan (1989). E. Gaussian surface
deﬂection model from Detorakis and Rougier (2012). Each model predicts
smaller deﬂection as a function of the distance from the load.

5

142

Area 3b

Area 3b of the somatosensory cortex has been modeled using neural ﬁeld
theory (Amari, 1977; Taylor, 1999; Wilson and Cowan, 1973) which
considers the cortex as a continuous surface Ω. Considering a stimulus
z, the dynamic of the ﬁeld is given by equation:

τ

∂u(x, t) ∂t

= −u(x, t)

-   

ZΩ

wl(x, y)f (u(y, t))dy

-   

I(x, z, t)

(3) 

decay term | {z }

lateral interaction {z

}

feed-forward input {z

}

where u(x, t) is the membrane potential at position x, τ is the membrane
time constant, f is the ﬁring rate function, wl is the lateral
connections function and I(x, z, t) is the output from the DCLM pathway
as deﬁned in previous section. The dynamic of the ﬁeld is tightly linked
to the lateral connections function wl that deﬁnes the behavior of the
ﬁeld (traveling waves, spiral waves, bump solutions, see Bressloﬀ (2011)
for extensive review). In Detorakis and Rougier (2012), we deﬁned wl as
a diﬀerence of Gaussian functions such as to obtain bump solutions. More
precisely, we assume wl is both isotropic and homogeneous (i.e. wl(x, y)
= wl(|x − y|)) and deﬁned as

wl(x) = we(x) − wi(x) = Ke exp

−x2 2σ2

e (cid:17)

(cid:16)

− Ki exp

−x2 2σ2

i (cid:17)

(cid:16)

(4) 

excitatory part {z

}

inhibitory part {z

}

where (Ke, σe) and (Ki, σi) are constants that describe the extent and
the strength of short-range excitation and long-range inhibition (σi ≫
σe).

Learning occurs at the thalamo-cortical level using an Oja-like learning
rule (proportional to a pre-synaptic measure multiplied by a
post-synaptic quantity) which solves stability problems that is known to
exist in the standard Hebbian learning rule (see Oja (1982)). It reads:

∂wf (x, t) ∂t

= γ (s(z) − wf (x, t))

pre-synaptic term {z

}

ZΩ

we(|x − y|)f (u(y, t))dy

(5) 

post-synaptic term {z

}

where γ is a constant learning rate. We showed in Detorakis and Rougier
(2012) how this learning rule, coupled with the neural ﬁeld, allow the
model to self-organize and develop topological representations of the
skin patch. All the details are given in Detorakis and Rougier (2012)
but brieﬂy, equation (3) allows the model to exhibit a single bump of
activity (for any input) and the learning rule (5) exploits this bump
solution to promote learning at position where the excitatory part of
the lateral connections function is maximal. It is to be noted that
because of the pre-synaptic term and the boundedness of receptors values
(i.e. are bounded between 0 and 1), feed-forward weights are also
bounded between 0 and 1.

Gain modulation

As explained earlier, the shape of the bump solution of the neural ﬁeld
can be controlled via lateral con- nections function wl. We have been
using until now a stereotyped proﬁle deﬁned by the extent and the
strength of short-range excitation (Ke, σe) and long-range inhibition
(Ki, σi). This proﬁle is used for the whole duration of the initial
training protocol and has a direct inﬂuence on the self-organization
process. We could have used instead a wider/weaker or thiner/stronger
proﬁle as shown in ﬁgure 3 but more importantly, we can also modify it
online, provided a signal is sent to indicate which proﬁle is to be used
for processing the next stimulus. This is what we refer as the
attentional signal, originating from higher cortical areas. More i) and
(K ′′ precisely, we can use two parameters sets , (K ′ i ), and use the
ﬁrst set when no attentional signal is present and the second one, when
an attentional signal is present.

e , K ′′

e, K ′

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

6

Cortical Layer

wi(x)

we(x)

Neuron

wf

Stimulus

Input Layer

Receptor

Figure 2: Schematic of the full model. Area 3b has been modeled using a
neural ﬁeld with lateral short- range excitation (we) and long-range
inhibition (wi). Each unit is fed with the information from all the 256
MEC receptors via feed-forward connections (wf ).

Figure 3: Gain modulation. The response of the model depends
functionally on the balance between lateral excitation (gain Ke) and
inhibition (gain Ki), allowing to widen (panel A) or sharpen (panel C)
the peak of activity when a stimulus is presented. If we consider the
trigger threshold to be the peak of nominal response (panel B), the same
stimulus can either trigger a sharp response or not trigger any response
at all, depending on the modulation. This modulation is considered in
this work as a form of somatosensory attention.

7

Figure 4: Protocol stimuli sets. A The training protocol set is made of
50000 stimuli distributed uniformly over the whole skin patch. At any
moment, only one stimulus is presented to the model. B The drum protocol
is based on a rotating drum made of 750 dots spread over the surface of
the drum. The rotation of the drum makes stimuli to enter on the left
side and exit on the right side of the skin patch, leading to temporal
correlation between the diﬀerent trials. At any moment, one to several
stimuli can simultaneously stimulate the skin patch. C The RoI protocol,
in the case of intensive training, is made of two sets of equal size
(12500) for a total of 25000 stimuli. One set is made of stimuli
exclusively located in the center of the skin patch and the other set is
made of stimuli located outside this central region. This results in a
higher (twofold) stimulus density in the central region. At any moment,
only one stimulus is presented to the model.

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

Protocols

Initial training

Since the model initially possesses random weights, it is ﬁrstly
necessary to train it in order to develop topological representations of
the skin patch. We thus re-implemented the training protocol that has
been used in Detorakis and Rougier (2012) and the training set is made
of 50000 stimuli with random positions uniformly distributed over the
whole skin patch. Each stimulus is presented once to the model and
equations (3) and (5) are evaluated simultaneously until stability is
achieved, i.e. there is no noticeable diﬀerence between u(t) and u(t +
δt). The model is reset and another stimulus is picked up until there is
no more available stimuli. A signiﬁcant diﬀerence with the original
model is the toric implementation of skin patch and cortical model as
well. This means that any part of a stimulus that lay outside the skin
patch reappears at the opposite side of the skin patch. The same holds
true for the cortical sheet. This has been done to avoid any boundary
eﬀects that are known to exist in self-organization models. Once the
training ends, the model has developed a topological representation of
the skin patch such that two neighbor neurons on area 3b represent two
neighbor location on the skin patch.

Drum Protocol

The drum protocol is a direct adaptation of the protocol that has been
used in DiCarlo et al. (1998). Authors used a cylindrical drum covered
with a plastic sheet (28 mm × 250 mm) that possesses raised dots pattern
(with a density of 10 dots per square centimeter for a total of 750
dots). The drum was mounted on a rotating drum stimulator and the
orientation and the angular velocity of the drum were adjusted to
produce proximal-to-distal stimulus movement at 40mm/sec across the skin
surface. The drum completed 100 revolutions and the total time of
simulation was 14 minutes and stepped a total distance of 20mm. We
adapted the drum protocol as a planar surface of size 250mm×30mm and
moved the skin patch over the full length (40mm/second) before jumping
back to the start and shifting up the patch by 200 µm. The drum

8

186

187

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

206

207

208

209

210

211

212

213

214

215

216

217

218

219

220

221

222

223

224

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

surface is made of 750 uniformly distributed dots, achieving a mean
density of 10 dots/cm2. Using a sample time step of 5ms, the model has
been fed with 120000 samples for a complete sweep of the drum surface.
Activity of all neurons are recorded at once without centering the drum
onto each individual receptive ﬁeld.

RoI Protocol

We ﬁrst deﬁned an arbitrary region of interest (RoI) on the surface of
skin patch whose size is one quarter of the total skin patch surface
(see ﬁgure 4 panel C, the shaded squared area in the middle of the skin
patch). For the intensive training session, we used a set of 25000
stimuli such that one out of two stimuli landed into the RoI (1 in / 1
out ratio, (see ﬁgure 4)). This means that the RoI, was twice more
stimulated compared to the rest part of the skin patch. We presented
each stimuli once to the model until no more stimuli were available.
Learning occurs for the whole duration of the protocol. For the
attentional experiment, we used 25000 uniformly spread stimuli over the
whole skin patch. We presented each stimulus once to the model until no
more stimuli were available. If a stimulus position was within the RoI,
(i.e. the center of the stimulus, which is the most active zone of a
stimulus) we explicitly instructed the model to attend to this stimulus
by modifying the gain of the lateral connections (Ke and Ki) as
explained in the gain modulation section. Learning occurs for the whole
duration of the protocol.

Results

Characterization of the RFs

We ﬁrst report results concerning the characterization of RF structures
observed in area 3b following the exact protocol of DiCarlo et
al. (1998), that was used to investigate the two-dimensional structure
of area 3b neuronal non-classical receptive ﬁelds (ncRFs) in three alert
monkeys (non-classical receptive ﬁelds are deﬁned in Appendix B). As
explained earlier, this protocol has been slightly adapted to meet the
constraints of the proposed computational model architecture. Following
the initial training protocol were cortical representations have been
shaped (see Detorakis and Rougier (2012)), we applied the drum protocol
for a total of 120000 samples (that can have multiple sites of skin
patch stimulation because of the raised dot patterns). From these data,
we applied the exact same linear regression algorithm proposed and used
by DiCarlo et al. (1998) for the characterization of the excitatory and
inhibitory components of each ncRF. More precisely, for each matrix
representing an non-classical receptive ﬁeld, we ﬁrst convolved it with
a Gaussian ﬁlter (µ = 0 and σ = 1.7) and applied a thresholding (10% of
the absolute peak value) on every value. If a value was below the
threshold, it was set to zero. We let each pixel of the non-classical
receptive ﬁeld to have at least two of the four neighbors non-zero and
of the same sign such that isolated islands of positive or negative
values were not allowed if they had a total area less than 0.7mm2. Each
time we computed a ncRF, we also computed the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) as well as the noise index, in order to constraint them to low
values (see appendix B). After this preprocessing stage, we measured the
respective size of excitatory (positive) and inhibitory (negative)
areas. The minimum and maximum values of excitatory ncRFs were 9.12mm2,
25.92mm2, respectively for a mean size of 14.142. The minimum and
maximum values of inhibitory ncRFs were 5.92mm2, 26.56mm2, respectively
for a mean size of 14.42. Figure 5 shows the bivariate plot of
excitatory versus inhibitory area (similar results have been found by
DiCarlo et al. (1998)). Furthermore, a k-means classiﬁcation of the
ncRFs was performed on the ncRFs in order to compare the number of ncRFs
classes from the model with the number of classes in DiCarlo et al.
(1998). The k-means classiﬁcation separated 16 diﬀerent classes
accodring to the topology of the excitatory and inhibitory areas
(homogeneity = 0.39, completeness = 1.0, V-measure = 0.56). We found
non-classical receptive ﬁelds whose excitatory area was surrounded by
the inhibitory one as well as non-classical receptive ﬁelds whose
excitatory area was facing the inhibitory area (see ﬁgure 5). It is to
be noted that ﬁgure 5 shows a remarkable similarity with physiological
results of DiCarlo et al., where most of the ncRFs are centered around a
central point of 15mm2 (excitatory) / 15mm2 (inhibitory). The spread is
larger in the case of DiCarlo but this was expected since we used a
toric stimulation.

9

Figure 5: Characterization of the ncRFs. From the experimental drum
protocol of DiCarlo et al. (1998), we recorded 120000 responses for each
of the 1024 neurons of the model and we subsequently applied the same
analysis with DiCarlo et al. (1998) to obtain the respective ncRF. The
scatter plot on the right displays the balance between excitatory and
inhibitory components of each ncRF. Excitatory area was measured as the
total positive area in the thresholded ncRF (positive ncRF regions with
values ≥ 10% of the peak absolute ncRF value, see Materials and Methods
and Appendix B). Inhibitory area was measured as the total
negative-thresholded ncRF area (negative ncRF regions with absolute
values ≤ 10% of the peak absolute ncRF value). The left part of the
ﬁgure illustrates the diversity of ncRFs and the letter corresponds to a
point in the scatter plot. The bottom row shows the distributions of the
sizes of ncRFs. The y-axis indicate the number of neurons (n=1024) and
the x-axis, from left to right displays the excitatory area of ncRFs,
the inhibitory area, the total area (is the sum of the excitatory and
inhibitory areas) and the ratio of excitatory area to inhibitory one in
logarithmic scale.

10

51030Excitatoryarea(mm2)51030Inhibitoryarea(mm2ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPn=1024110100Area(mm2)0100200NumberofneuronsExcitatoryArea110100Area(mm2)InhibitoryArea110100Area(mm2)Totalarea0.1110Excitatory/InhibitoryareaRatio232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

263

264

265

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

273

274

275

276

Training the RoI

During the speciﬁc training of the RoI, we considered a set of 25000
stimuli, half of them being located in the RoI. We will later refer to
this as the intensive protocol. At the end of the protocol, we measured
the location and the size of the classical receptive ﬁelds (cRF) or
simply receptive ﬁelds (RF) (see appendix B for details) and compared
them to the control setup, that corresponds to the end of the nominal
training period (or the start of this protocol). Figure 6 (panel B)
reveals a strong migration of most RF towards the RoI with an overall
ﬁnal density being higher in the center of the RoI. We also measured RFs
size at the end of the protocol and compared them with control. The
control setup shows a normal distribution of sizes around a central
value (2.1mm2 , SD=0.42) while the intensive training setup leads to a
signiﬁcant reduction of the RFs (1.6mm2 , SD=0.48). Overall, there has
been a signiﬁcant decrease in the mean size of RFs (see ﬁgure 7, panel
B’). Such results are consistent with Xerri et al. (1994) that shows
that intensive training over a skin area can cause the corresponding
cortical territory expansion with a simultaneous shrink of receptive
ﬁelds of neurons of the somatosensory cortex.

Modulating the RoI

In order to make the model to attend to the RoI, we considered a set of
25000 stimuli, uniformly spread over the whole skin patch and we
instructed the model to attend to a stimulus if this was within the RoI,
i.e. using diﬀerent gains for the lateral connections. The major
diﬀerence compared to the intensive training experiment is the
non-migration of the RFs towards the center of the RoI as shown in ﬁgure
6, panel C. The distribution remains actually quasi-uniform and the RoI
does not beneﬁt from signiﬁcant higher density. However, the sizes of
the RFs have shrunk by 33%, leading to a mean size of 1.4mm2 (SD=0.37).
This demonstrates that migration and shrinkage of RFs are actually two
distinct processes that can be (partly) separated.

Joint eﬀect of training and modulation

For studying the joint eﬀect of training and modulation, we mixed the
two RoI protocols and considered both a non-uniform set of 25000
stimuli, half of them being located in the RoI and we instructed the
model to attend to a stimulus if it was located in the RoI. The ﬁnal
density of RFs shown in ﬁgure 6D reveals a massive migration of the RFs
towards the RoI with a simultaneous shrinkage in their sizes compared to
the control conditions (0.71mm2, SD=0.04). These results point out that
the combined eﬀects of intensive training and modulation actually sum
up, leading to both a massive migration and a dramatic shrinkage of RFs,
down to half the nominal size.

Discussion

Using the model presented in Detorakis and Rougier (2012), we ﬁrst
validated it using the protocol and neurophysiological data from DiCarlo
et al. (1998). We adapted the protocol to meet computational constraints
and relevant recorded data. Results clearly indicate that the model is
able to capture the main aspects of the original data recorded on three
alert monkeys with most of ncRFs to contain a single region of
excitation and one or more regions of inhibition located on one, two,
three, or all four sides of the excitatory center. This is the ﬁrst, to
the best of our knowledge, computational model of area 3b that is able
to replicate real neurophysiological data with such accuracy even though
we used a very simple model for the distal ﬁnger pad and the dorsal
column-medial lemniscus, as well. This tends to conﬁrm that the
thalamo-cortical feed- forward connections are an adequate site of
plasticity while cortico-cortical connections drive the competition
mechanism. Furthermore, even if the present study has been circumscribed
to the spatial characteristics of the receptive ﬁelds, (Sripati et al.,
2006a) have shown spatio-temporal receptive ﬁelds (STRF) in area 3b tend
to have early excitatory region followed by in-ﬁeld (replacing) greater
inhibition. Authors conclude that such greater inhibition observed in
cortical STRFs points to the existence of underlying intracortical
mechanisms that is very consistent with our own hypothesis. To go
further in this direction, we would need

11

Figure 6: RF Migrations. A. The distribution of RFs over the skin patch
is quasi-uniformly distributed for the control. B. Intensive training
onto the RoI makes RFs to migrate towards the RoI leading to a higher
density of RFs within the RoI. C. Explicitly attending the RoI modiﬁes
only marginally the distribution of RFs that tend to remain
quasi-uniformly distributed over the whole skin patch. D. The joint
eﬀect of intensive training and attention leads to an even greater
migration of RFs towards the RoI (compared to intensive training only).

12

012345678910(mm)012345678910(mm)ControlA012345678910(mm)012345678910(mm)IntensiveB012345678910(mm)012345678910(mm)AttentionC012345678910(mm)012345678910(mm)Attention
and intensiveDFigure 7: RF Shrinkage. A’. The relative histograms of
RFs sizes after initial training (50000 samples) follows a normal
distribution. B’. After model training, speciﬁcally in the RoI (with a
1/1 ratio) using 25000 extra samples, the mean RF size has been reduced
by 25% compared to the nominal mean size. C’. By sharpening the model
response when a stimulus is presented within the RoI (25000 samples),
the mean RF size has been reduced by 33% compared to the nominal mean
size. D’. The joint eﬀect of training and modulation (25000 samples)
leads to a dramatic shift in relative size of RF, with a mean size being
half of the nominal mean size. A” D”. Receptive ﬁeld of a single cell
recorded at the end of each of the aforementioned experiments. The
receptive ﬁeld size in the attentional/intensive condition (0.007 mm2)
has shrunk to one third of the control size (0.024 mm2).

13

-50%0+50%020406080A’Reference (REF)(Mean:-0.00%, STE: 1.3)#
Cells-50%0+50%020406080B’Intensive Stimulation (IS)(Mean:-24.52%, STE:
1.3)# Cells-50%0+50%020406080C’Long Term Gain Modulation
(LTGM)(Mean:-32.63%, STE: 1.1)# Cells-50%0+50%020406080D’LTGM +
IS(Mean:-48.70%, STE: 1.1)#
Cells0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)REFsize: 0.024
mm2A’‘010.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)ISsize: 0.011
mm2B’‘010.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)LTGMsize: 0.015
mm2C’‘010.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)0.00.20.40.60.81.0(mm)LTGM + ISsize: 0.007
mm2D’’01277

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

287

288

289

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

317

318

319

320

321

322

323

324

325

326

327

to consider ﬁnite transmission speed in cortico-cortical connections
instead of instantenous connection Hutt and Rougier (2010).

We have also shown how this competition mechanism can be explicitly
modulated by the modiﬁcation of the gain at both the excitatory and
inhibitory lateral connection levels. Such instructed modulation leads
to receptive ﬁelds shrinkage in the region of interest while keeping
intact the overall organization, with no noticeable migration of RFs. We
identiﬁed such modulation as a form of spatial attention that is
believed to be deployed selectively on this or that part of the body.
Interestingly enough, these eﬀects are known to occur in the visual
system and a number of recent studies have identiﬁed such eﬀects in area
MT (Anton- Erxleben et al., 2009; Womelsdorf et al., 2008). More
precisely, authors have shown how attention inside the cRF shrinks it,
whereas directing attention next to the cRF expands it. Authors uses in
their modeling work a bell shaped attentional signal while we have been
using a constant attentional signal, modifying the gain for the whole
population at once.

However, in the literature, the evidence for the eﬀects of such spatial
attention on SI are still contra- dictory. Hsiao and Vega-Bermudez
(2001) has shown that attention is engaged in the modiﬁcation of RFs in
both primary and secondary somatosensory cortices and Braun et
al. (2002) have conﬁrmed such engagement of attention in the primary
somatosensory cortex using neuroimaging techniques. However, Godde et
al. (2000) claimed that attention is not critical in enhancing
performance during a discrimination task even though, consecutive
training or pairing stimulation (leading to co-activation) can aﬀect the
RFs. In the case of intensive training of the RoI, our model tends to
suggest a large expansion of the cortical territory with a simultaneous
shrinkage of the receptive ﬁelds as well as strong migration of their
centers towards the RoI. These ﬁndings are still contradictory with
psychophysical and neurophysiological studies such as Godde et
al. (2000); Pilz et al. (2004); Recanzone et al. (1992), where authors
noticed that the cortical representations undergo an expansion but at
the same time RFs undergo a similar expansion. However, other
neurophysiological and neuroimaging studies have shown that when
cortical representations expand, RFs sizes seem to decrease Elbert et
al. (1995); Xerri et al. (1994). These latter results are also
consistent with early ﬁndings of Sur et al. (1980). They found, from
neurophysiological recordings and mappings that the magniﬁcation factor
of cortical representations is related to the size of RFs. More
precisely, the magniﬁcation factor is proportional to the size of RFs
(the smaller the RFs the larger the cortical representation). Our
ﬁndings tend to conﬁrm that cortical representations in the case of
intensive stimulation increase their relative size with a simultaneous
RFs shrinkage. These ﬁndings indicate that there are two distinct
processes at work, namely modulation and training, that are believed to
be present simultaneously in most cases, while there may exist a few
cases where only one process is active. This may reconcile the
aforementioned contradictory results. To conﬁrm these ﬁndings, it would
thus be necessary to setup new experiments where modulation and training
needs to be carefully dissociated. This can be done, for example, by
precisely controlling the amount of training received by a subject and
by distracting the subject such as drifting attentional process away
from the primary task.

Even if our model suggests a hypothesis on how somatosensory spatial
attention may modify the pro- cessing of stimulus and promote reshaping
of RFs, nothing has been said so far about the exact nature, the origin
and the selectivity of such attentional signal. Sarter et al. (2005)
have proposed a possible circuitry involving the basal forebrain
corticopetal cholinergic system since it has been observed in several
studies Donoghue and Carroll (1987); Jimenez-Capdeville et al. (1997)
that the loss of cortical cholin- ergic system directly impacts
attentional functions. Furthermore, Juliano et al. (1991) have shown
that the cholinergic depletion prevents expansion of somatosensory
topographic maps, suggesting that choliner- gic neurotransmitters are
critical in the structure of cortical representations. Similarly,
Rasmusson and Dykes (1988); Tremblay et al. (1990a,b) proposed that a
cholinergic signal is responsible for the gain modulation of neuronal
populations and that the co-activation of basal forebrain and the
somatosensory cortex by cutaneous stimulation lead to enhanced cortical
activity. Overall, such a signal may originate from a complex network
involving the insular cortex, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the
posterior parietal cortex, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, the
posterior cingulate cortex and the anterior cingulate cortex

14

328

329

330

331

332

333

334

335

336

337

338

339

340

341

342

343

344

345

346

347

348

349

350

351

352

as proposed by Menon and Uddin (2010). The main point is that the
insular cortex acts as a switch between two diﬀerent prefrontal networks
leading to an attentional eﬀect through saliency occurring in the
anterior insular cortex. We can thus speculate that such a cholinergic
signal may aﬀect the gain of intra- cortical lateral connections and the
explicit signal that has been used during the attended RoI protocol may
originate from a frontal decision.

Finally, even though we hardly notice it in our everyday life,
somatosensory attention plays a critical role in our perception of the
outer world. For example, the contact of clothes on the skin can be
largely unattended even though all body receptors are activated at once.
This results from habituation and yet, it is still possible to
concentrate on a speciﬁc part of the body to actually experience the
contact. Such spatial selectivity is very similar to the concept of the
spotlight of attention proposed by Posner (1980) in the eighties for the
visual perception. At that time, authors were hypothesizing for the
existence of a dedicated control mechanism even though this view was
later challenged by the premotor theory of attention proposed by
Rizzolatti and Craighero (1988). This later theory postulates instead
that there is no need for two diﬀerent mechanisms (attention and action)
and has received support from several electrophysiological and brain
imaging studies. However, how this theory can be adapted to
somatosensory attention remains unclear. Our model cannot answer the
question on the selectivity since we only used a broad and constant
modulation of the model. This choice has been made because we consider a
small part of SI cortex where exactly one bump of activity can exist
anytime. If we were to consider a larger part of SI, where for example
several digit representations would co-exist, we would need a selective
attentional signal to be able to direct gain modulations to the relevant
population involved in the representation of the RoI. This is quite a
complex problem, since this would involve not only a sensory
representation of several digits (sensory homunculus), but also a motor
representation (motor homunculus) and visual information as well. This
is far beyond the scope of the present work but we think this might
allow for a better understanding of somatosensory attention.

15

353

354

355

356

357

358

359

360

361

362

363

364

365

366

367

368

369

370

371

372

373

374

375

376

377

378

379

380

381

382

383

384

385

386

387

388

389

390

391

392

References

Amari, S. (1977), Dynamics of pattern formation in lateral-inhibition
type neural ﬁelds, Biological cybernet-

ics, 27, 2, 77–87

Anton-Erxleben, K., Stephan, V., and Treue, S. (2009), Attention
reshapes center-surround receptive ﬁeld

structure in macaque cortical area mt, Cerebral Cortex, 19, 10,
2466–2478

Braun, C., Haug, M., Wiech, K., Birbaumer, N., Elbert, T., Roberts, L.,
et al. (2002), Functional organization

of primary somatosensory cortex depends on the focus of attention,
Neuroimage, 17, 3, 1451–1458

Bressler, S. L. and Tognoli, E. (2006), Operational principles of
neurocognitive networks, International

Journal of Psychophysiology, 60, 139–148

Bressloﬀ, P. (2011), Spatiotemporal dynamics of continuum neural ﬁelds,
Journal of Physics A: Mathematical

and Theoretical, 45, 3, 033001

D.A. Norman, T. S. (1980), Consciousness and self-regulation: advances
in research and theory (Kluwer /

Plenum Publ), chapter Attention to action: Willed and automatic control
of behavior, 1–18

Dandekar, K., Raju, B. I., and Srinivasan, M. A. (2003), 3-d
ﬁnite-element models of human and monkey ﬁngertips to investigate the
mechanics of tactile sense, Journal of biomechanical engineering, 125,
5, 682– 691

Detorakis, G. and Rougier, N. (2012), A neural ﬁeld model of the
somatosensory cortex: Formation, main-

tenance and reorganization of ordered topographic maps, PloS one, 7, 7,
e40257

DiCarlo, J. J., Johnson, K. O., and Hsiao, S. S. (1998), Structure of
receptive ﬁelds in area 3b of primary

somatosensory cortex in the alert monkey., Journal of neuroscience, 18,
7, 2626–2645

Donoghue, J. and Carroll, K. (1987), Cholinergic modulation of sensory
responses in rat primary somatic

sensory cortex, Brain Research, 408, 367 – 371

Edelman, G. (1987), Neural Darwinism (Basic Books, New York)

Elbert, T., Pantev, C., Wienbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., Taub, E., et
al. (1995), Increased cortical representa-

tion of the ﬁngers of the left hand in string players, Science, 270,
5234, 305–307

Feinberg, I., Thode, H. J., and Chugani, J., H.T. an March (1990), Gamma
distribution model describes maturational curves for delta wave
amplitude, cortical metabolic rate and synaptic density, Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 142, 2, 149–161

Fritz, J., Elhilali, M., David, S., and Shamma, S. (2007), Does
attention play a role in dynamic receptive

ﬁeld adaptation to changing acoustic salience in a1?, Hearing research,
229, 1-2, 186

Godde, B., Stauﬀenberg, B., Spengler, F., and Dinse, H. (2000), Tactile
coactivation-induced changes in

spatial discrimination performance, The Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 4,
1597–1604

Goodwin, A., Browning, A., and Wheat, H. (1995), Representation of
curved surfaces in responses of mechanoreceptive aﬀerent ﬁbers
innervating the monkeys ﬁngerpad, The Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 1,
798–810

Hsiao, S. and Vega-Bermudez, F. (2001), 8 attention in the somatosensory
system, in R. Nelson, ed., The

somatosensory system: Deciphering the brain’s own body image (CRC)

Hsiao, S. S., O’shaughnessy, D., and Johnson, K. O. (1993), Eﬀects of
selective attention on spatial form processing in monkey primary and
secondary somatosensory cortex, Journal of Neurophysiology, 70, 1,
444–447

16

393

394

395

396

397

398

399

400

401

402

403

404

405

406

407

408

409

410

411

412

413

414

415

416

417

418

419

420

421

422

423

424

425

426

427

428

429

430

431

432

Hutt, A. and Rougier, N. P. (2010), Activity spread and breathers
induced by ﬁnite transmission speeds in

two-dimensional neural ﬁelds, Physical Review E, 82, 5, 055701

Jimenez-Capdeville, M., Dykes, R., and Myasnikov, A. (1997), Diﬀerential
control of cortical activity by the basal forebrain in rats: a role for
both cholinergic and inhibitory inﬂuences, Journal of Computational
Neuroscience, 381, 53–67

Juliano, S., Ma, W., and Eslin, D. (1991), Cholinergic depletion
prevents expansion of topographic maps in

somatosensory cortex, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
88, 3, 780–784

Menon, V. and Uddin, L. (2010), Saliency, switching, attention and
control: a network model of insula

function, Brain Structure and Function, 214, 5, 655–667

Moran, J. and Desimone, R. (1985), Selective attention gates visual
processing in the extrastriate cortex,

Science, 229, 782–784

Nordlie, E., Gewaltig, M.-O., and Plesser, H. E. (2009), Towards
reproducible descriptions of neuronal

network models, PLoS Comput Biol, 5, 8, e1000456,
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000456

Oja, E. (1982), Simpliﬁed neuron model as a principal component
analyzer, Journal of mathematical biology,

15, 3, 267–273

Pare, M., Smith, A., and Rice, F. (2002), Distribution and terminal
arborizations of cutaneous mechanore- ceptors in the glabrous ﬁnger pads
of the monkey, The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 445, 347–359

Phillips, J., Johnson, K., and Hsiao, S. (1988), Spatial pattern
representation and transformation in monkey

somatosensory cortex, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
85, 4, 1317–1321

Picton, T. and Hillyard, S. (1974), Human auditory evoked potentials.
ii: Eﬀects of attention, Electroen-

cephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 36, 191–200

Pilz, K., Veit, R., Braun, C., and Godde, B. (2004), Eﬀects of
co-activation on cortical organization and

discrimination performance, Neuroreport, 15, 17, 2669

Posner, M. I. (1980), Orienting of attention, Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 32, 3–25

Purves, D., Augustine, G. J., Fitzpatrick, D., Katz, L. C., LaMantia,
A.-S., McNamara, J. O., et al. (2001), The Major Aﬀerent Pathway for
Mechanosensory Information: The Dorsal Column-Medial Lemniscus System
(Sinauer Associates), chapter The somatic sensory system, 199 – 202

Rasmusson, D. and Dykes, R. (1988), Long-term enhancement of evoked
potentials in cat somatosensory cortex produced by co-activation of the
basal forebrain and cutaneous receptors, Experimental Brain Research,
70, 2, 276–286

Recanzone, G., Merzenich, M., Jenkins, W., Grajski, K., and Dinse, H.
(1992), Topographic reorganization of the hand representation in
cortical area 3b owl monkeys trained in a frequency-discrimination task,
Journal of Neurophysiology, 67, 5, 1031–1056

Rizzolatti, G. and Craighero, L. (1988), Advances in psychological
science: Vol.2. Biological and cognitive aspects (Sabourin, M. and
Craik, F. and Robert, M.), chapter Spatial attention: Mechanisms and
theories, 171 – 198

Salinas, E., Abbott, L., et al. (1997), Invariant visual responses from
attentional gain ﬁelds, Journal of

Neurophysiology, 77, 6, 3267–3272

Salinas, E. and Sejnowski, T. J. (2001), Book review: Gain modulation in
the central nervous system: Where

behavior, neurophysiology, and computation meet, The Neuroscientist, 7,
5, 430–440

17

433

434

435

436

437

438

439

440

441

442

443

444

445

446

447

448

449

450

451

452

453

454

455

456

457

458

459

460

461

Sarter, M., Hasselmo, M., Bruno, J., Givens, B., et al. (2005),
Unraveling the attentional functions of cortical cholinergic inputs:
interactions between signal-driven and cognitive modulation of signal
detection, Brain Research Reviews, 48, 1, 98–111

Srinivasan, M. (1989), Surface deﬂection of primate ﬁngertip under line
load, Journal of Biomechanics, 22,

4, 343–349

Sripati, A., Yoshioka, T., Denchev, P., S.S., H., and Johnson, K.
(2006a), Spatiotemporal receptive ﬁelds of peripheral aﬀerents and
cortical area 3b and 1 neurons in the primate somatosensory system, The
Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 7, 2101–2114

Sripati, A. P., Bensmaia, S. J., and Johnson, K. O. (2006b), A continuum
mechanical model of mechanore-

ceptive aﬀerent responses to indented spatial patterns, Journal of
neurophysiology, 95, 6, 3852–3864

Sur, M., Merzenich, M., Kaas, J., et al. (1980), Magniﬁcation,
receptive-ﬁeld area, and hypercolumn size in

areas 3b and 1 of somatosensory cortex in owl monkeys, J Neurophysiol,
44, 2, 295–311

Taylor, J. G. (1999), Neural bubble dynamics in two dimensions:
foundations, Biological Cybernetics, 80,

5167–5174

Treisman, A. (1988), Features and objects: The bartlett memorial
lecture, The Quarterly Journal of Exper-

imental Psychology, 40, 201–237

Tremblay, N., Warren, R., and Dykes, R. (1990a), Electrophysiological
studies of acetylcholine and the role of the basal forebrain in the
somatosensory cortex of the cat. i. cortical neurons excited by
glutamate, Journal of neurophysiology, 64, 4, 1199–1211

Tremblay, N., Warren, R., and Dykes, R. (1990b), Electrophysiological
studies of acetylcholine and the role of the basal forebrain in the
somatosensory cortex of the cat. ii. cortical neurons excited by somatic
stimuli, Journal of neurophysiology, 64, 4, 1212–1222

Wilson, H. R. and Cowan, J. D. (1973), A mathematical theory of the
functional dynamics of cortical and

thalamic nervous tissue, Kybernetic, 13, 55–80

Womelsdorf, T., Anton-Erxleben, K., and Treue, S. (2008), Receptive ﬁeld
shift and shrinkage in macaque middle temporal area through attentional
gain modulation, The Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 36, 8934– 8944

Xerri, C., Stern, J., and Merzenich, M. (1994), Alterations of the
cortical representation of the rat ventrum

induced by nursing behavior, The Journal of neuroscience, 14, 3,
1710–1721

18

462

463

Appendix A - Detailed description of the model

Tabular description

A Model Summary Populations Topology Connectivity Neuron model Channel
model Synapse model Plasticity Input Measurements

Three: receptors, thalamus and cortex Two-dimensional, toric Feed
forward: one-to-all, lateral: all-to-all (including self-connections)
Dynamic rate model – – Oja-like learning rule Touch pressure from skin
receptors Classical and non-classical receptive ﬁelds, topographic maps

Type

B Topology Name Receptors Two-dimensional toric regular grid with jitter
(5%) Thalamus None Cortex

Two-dimensional toric regular grid

Elements

C Populations Name Receptors Mechanic input Thalamus Thalamic neuron
Cortex

Cortical neuron

Size 256 256 32 × 32

D Connectivity Name – Wf

Target

Source Receptors Thalamus Excitatory, ﬁxed, one to one, non-plastic
Thalamus Cortex

Pattern

We

Wi

Cortex

Cortex

Cortex

Cortex

Excitatory, random uniform, one to all, plastic Wf (x, t) = U (0, 1)
Excitatory, Gaussian, toric, all to all, non-plastic We(|x − y)| = Ke
exp Inhibitory, Gaussian, toric, all to all, non-plastic Wi(|x − y|) =
Ki exp

−kx−yk 2σ2 e

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

2

2

−kx−yk 2σ2 i

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

19

E1 Neuron Model Name Type Membrane potential

Thalamic Rate model I(x, z, t) = 1 − 1 k

k i=0 |si(z) − wi

f (x, t)|

P

E2 Neuron Model Name Type Membrane potential

Cortical Dynamic rate model 1 τ

∂t = −U (x, t) + α

∂U (x,t)

Ω Wl(|x − y|)f (U (y, t))dy + αI(x, z, t)

R

F Plasticity Name Description 1 Wf γ

∂Wf (x,t) ∂t

= γ(s(z, t) − wf (x, t))

Ω We(|x − y|)f (u(y, t))dy

R

G Input Type Mechanic

Description si(z) = exp(− 1

2 kz − rik)

H Measurements Classical and extended receptive ﬁelds of all cortical
neurons

Table 1: Tabular description of the model following the prescription of
Nordlie et al. (2009)

464

465

466

467

468

Algorithms

Training protocol

The initial training protocol described by equations (1) to (5) can be
described using the following algorithm. The full description of the
learning process is given in Materials and Methods section and in
Detorakis and Rougier (2012) as well.

Algorithm 1 Learning protocol Require: Ke, Ki, σe, σi, γ, α, τ, dt, S, ε

Compute we, wi and wl according to equation (4) for each stimulus z in S
do Reset the activity u(x, 0) Compute receptors activity s(z) according
to equation (1) Compute input activity I(x, t) according to equation (2)
while |u(t) − u(t + dt)| < ε do

Update u(x, t) according to equation (3) Update wf (x, t) according to
equation (5)

end while

end for

20

469

470

471

472

473

474

475

476

477

478

479

480

481

482

483

484

485

486

487

488

489

RoI/modulation protocol

The RoI protocol with modulation requires a slightly diﬀerent alorithm
since we, wi and wl depend on the position of the stimulus.

i, K”e, K”i, σe, σi, γ, α, τ, dt, S, ε i and w′ i and w′′

Algorithm 2 RoI/modulation protocol e, K ′ Require: K ′ e, w′ Compute w′
Compute w′′ e , w′′ for each stimulus z in S do Reset the activity u(x,
0) Compute receptors activity s(z) according to equation (1) Compute
input activity I(x, t) according to equation (2) if stimulus is inside
the RoI then

l according to equation (4) l according to equation (4)

we, wi, wl ← w′

e, w′

i, w′ l

else

we, wi, wl ← w′′

e , w′′

i , w′′ l

end if while |u(t) − u(t + dt)| < ε do

Update u(x, t) according to equation (3) Update wf (x, t) according to
equation (5)

end while

end for

Convergence

In order to measure the convergence of the learning process, we
measured:

1.  the evolution over time of the root mean square error (RMSE) of the
    feed-forward weights

2.  the evolution over time of the receptive ﬁelds during the
    development of the topographic map and

during the RoI protocol

RMSE has been measured using the following equation:

RMSE[wf ] =

1 M

M

Xi=0

( ˆwi

f − wi

f )2,

(6) 

f dsignate the ﬁnal feed-forward weights and wi

where ˆwi f the feed-forward weight at epoch i. Data is recorded every
50 epochs and RMSE is computed at the end of the simulation since it
requires the ﬁnal weights. Figure 8 displays RMSE for initial training
and clearly shows the rapid convergence of the model on the ﬁnal set of
weights.

Parameters

All the parameters of the model are given in table 2 below, where n is
the number of neurons of the cortex model, Ke is the excitatory gain, σe
is the variance of the excitatory lateral connections, Ki is the
inhibitory gain, σi is the variance of inhibitory lateral connections, α
is a free scaling parameter, τ is the synapses temporal decay constant,
and γ is the learning rate. For the RoI protocol, we use two sets of
parameter, the ﬁrst set (RoI out) is used whenever the center of a
stimulus is not within the RoI while the second set (RoI in) is used
each time a the center of a stimulus is within the RoI. The parameters
of the model have been tuned manually and a more detailed description of
the role of each parameter can be found in Detorakis and Rougier (2012).

21

Figure 8: Root-mean-square-error over thalamo-cortical weights. Left.
RMSE has been computed every 50 epochs during the initial training
protocol and show a rapid convergence after 5000 epochs Right. RMSE has
been computed for all RoI protocols to ensure no divergence occurs
during training.

P rotocol

n

Ke

σe Ki

σi

α

τ

γ

Training Drum RoI out RoI in

32×32 32×32 32×32 32×32

3.72 3.72 8.02 3.72

0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1

2.40 2.40 6.10 2.40

1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0

0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1

1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0

0.03 – 0.03 0.03

Table 2: Model parameters

22

0100002000030000Epochs0.050.000.050.100.150.200.250.30Root mean square
error (RMSE) during initial trainingEpoch 0Epoch 500Epoch 1000Epoch
5000Epoch 100000.000.01RMSE / Intensive training0.000.01RMSE /
Modulation within RoI40000500006000070000Epochs0.000.01textRMSE /
Intensive + Modulation490

491

492

493

494

495

Simulation details

Simulations were performed on a HP Z800 Workstation with 8Gb of memory.
The source code of all simulations is written in Python using Numpy and
Scipy scientiﬁc libraries, and it can be found at http://
webpages.lss.supelec.fr/perso/georgios.detorakis/software/index.html.
The training simulation consumes ∼ 45MB of physical memory and requires
∼ 30 minutes of real time (measured with time Unix command). In all
simulations, we used parameters given in table 2.

23

496

497

Appendix B - Data analysis

Classical receptive ﬁelds

A classical receptive ﬁeld or a receptive ﬁeld is deﬁned as the locus of
the skin on which a stimulus triggers a neural response, and describes
as well the impact of the stimulus to the ﬁring rate of a neuron. A cRF
is a two-dimensional surface, which slope indicates the impact of the
stimulus and its location points to the skin surface which is
represented by the corresponding neuron. We computed the cRF of each
neuron using a grid of p × p regularly spaced stimuli over the
normalized skin patch. For each stimulus and after the model has
converged, the activity of each neuron of the model has been recorded
and aggregated into a p × p matrix that was identiﬁed as the cRF of the
neuron. cRFs have been further charaterized by determining their center
of mass and size. The center of mass C is computed according to the
following equation:

C =

Visi

2

p

Xi=0 p

2

Vi

Xi=0

(7) 

498

499

500

501

502

503

504

where si is the position of a stimulus (i in [1, p2]) and Vi is the
related activity of the neuron (activity of the neuron when stimulus si
is presented). The cRF area is computed using a normalized sum of the
elements of the cRF that are grater than a threshold value (< 0.05).
Using these two informations, we can build plots of cRFs lying at their
respective position on the skin patch with high precision. We can
therefore qualify the topographic organization of the cRF and, when
relevant, we can deﬁne the migration as well as size modiﬁcation. The
density of cRF over the skin patch was evaluated using a Gaussian ﬁlter
with standard deviation of 0.5 in each dimension.

505

Non-classical Receptive ﬁelds

We deﬁne non-classical receptive ﬁelds as the weights b that minimize
the error between the predicted ﬁring rates of neurons and the observed
ones. Such non-classical receptive ﬁelds reveal what is the optimal
stimulus and how stimulus aﬀect the ﬁring rates of neurons. We computed
non-classical receptive ﬁelds (ncRFs as opposed to cRFs) using the
protocol and method (analogue to reverse correlation) deﬁned in DiCarlo
et al. (1998). Therefore, the predicted impulse rate rp of a neuron in
response to the nth stimulus is deﬁned to be the sum of the eﬀects of
each skin subregion to the neuron (see drum protocol for more details).
Hence,

rp = b0 +

p

Xi=1

bixi(n)

(8) 

where n is the number of the stimuli, p is the number of the diﬀerent
skin subregions, xi is the stimulus relief, b0 is the background ﬁring
rate and bi is the strength of the eﬀect of a dot (since the stimulus
each time is a random dot pattern). Rewriting equation (8) in vector
form we have,

rp = Xb

506

507

508

509

510

511

where r is a n × 1 vector of the ﬁring rates, X is a n × p matrix with
values of ones in the ﬁrst column and the stimuli in the remaining
columns. Finally b is a p × 1 vector, which contains the weights of the
eﬀect of a stimulus to the neuron. This term is actually the
non-classical receptive ﬁeld of a neuron, since its values indicate the
way that a stimulus aﬀect the ﬁring rate properties of a neuron. In
addition, b can be used in order to investigate further the optimality
of each stimulus, in terms of neural responses. Besides the predicted
ﬁring rates, we had also a vector of observed discharge rates for every
neuron, ro.

24

In order to compute the vector b, which minimizes the mean-squared
error between rp and ro, we solved

the linear normal equations XT Xb = XT ro by inverting the stimulus
autocorrelation matrix,

b = (XT X)−1XT ro

(9) 

512

513

514

515

516

517

518

519

520

521

522

523

524

525

526

527

528

529

530

531

532

533

534

535

536

537

538

539

540

541

542

543

544

545

546

547

548

549

This method allows to compute the non-classical receptive ﬁelds, b for
all the neurons at one and indi- cates skin area that contribute
positively to the ﬁring rate (excitatory part) or negatively (inhibitory
part). Throughout of this work anytime we refer to the non-classical
receptive ﬁelds we mean the optimal vectors b. For more details about
this method refer to DiCarlo et al. (1998).

Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and Noise Index (NI)

When we applied the threshold method described in the main text, we also
measured the SNR and the Noise Index. From signal processing deﬁnition,
noise is deﬁned to be the residual of the subtraction between an
original signal s and the ﬁltered one ¯s (see main text for more details
about ﬁltering and thresholding method). In our case, the original
signal is the receptive ﬁeld and the ﬁltered signal is the receptive
ﬁeld after S the application of a Gaussian ﬁlter with zero mean and
variance 1, 7. SNR is given by SNR=10 log10 , N (cid:17) where S is the
power of the original signal s and N is the noise power. We measured the
SNR for each RF and we found that the mean SNR was 8 (S.D.=1.5).

(cid:16)

In addition, and in accordance with DiCarlo et al. (1998), we computed
the Noise Index (NI) according to equation N I = 100 Var[noise] max{|s|}
. N I is given in terms of the absolute peak of the original signal s.
We measured the Noise Index for each of the RF, ﬁnding a mean value of
1.5% (S.D.=0.01). Conclusively, both measures SN R and Noise Index
pinpoint that the noise was eliminated.

Relative histogram of cRFS

Histograms of receptive ﬁeld sizes have been made relatively to the
control case in order to underline the various changes. Considering the
mean size M (over the 32 × 32 RFs) of the control and a set {Xi}n of
observations, histogram were built using a set {Yi}n such that Yi =
100(Xi − m)/m with a ﬁxed size bins of width 8%. Any bin with negative
abscissa indicated a shrinking in RF size while positive abscissa
indicated an expansion.

Cortical representation

Cortical representation is deﬁned as the area of the cortical surface
that respond when a stimulus is present within the RoI. Using the RoI
protocol, we recorded the two-dimensional activation of the whole
cortical model if, and only if, the stimulus center was located within
the RoI (roughly half of the 25,000 stimuli). We summed these
activations and normalized the result to get values in the [0,1]
interval.

Spatial event plot

During the execution of the drum protocol, the alignment of the stimulus
and the responses of a speciﬁc neuron was done by applying the spatial
event plot (SEP) method described in Phillips et al. (1988) and used by
DiCarlo et al. (1998). The latter used a variation of SEP method in
order to achieve better resolution. Since we deal with a computational
model, the ﬁrst version of the method was used because it is easier to
achieve the alignment of the stimulus and the neural response. We
isolated the receptive ﬁeld of a speciﬁc neuron and applied the drum
protocol (see main text for more details), recording all the responses
of that neuron. The stimulus and the responses of the neuron were
recorded for later processing. We processed the array of the responses
by assigning a one to the element of array which contained an evoked
response and a zero otherwise. Because the events array is a
one-dimensional, we had to transform it into a two-dimensional one in
order to ﬁt the drum (input space). Therefore, we started from the lower
right

25

550

551

552

553

554

555

corner (where the ﬁrst stimulus was applied according to the drum
protocol) and we continuously skimmed the array. Every time the drum
swept was completed, we moved the next line of the array above the
current one. At the end of this process, we obtained a spatial event
plot, as it is depicted in ﬁgure 9B. In addition to the SEP, we also
convolved the stimuli (dot patterns) with the non-classical receptive
ﬁeld of a neuron such as to obtain a prediction of the responses of the
neuron to each stimulus. This method leads to the results shown in ﬁgure
9A for a speciﬁc neuron.

B

m m

0.030

0.025

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.005

0.000

Observed response

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

mm

Figure 9: Observed and predicted responses. A. Neural impulse rates of
the neuron (20, 16). In order to obtain this plot, we convolved the ncRF
of the neuron with the random dot stimulus pattern. B. Spatial event
plot of neuron (20, 16). Each dot represents the position where a
stimulus triggers a response for the neuron. The axis x and y represent
the length and the width of the drum (drum protocol, see the main text)
in mm, respectively.

26


