Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information within the
hippocampus: a computational study Randa Kassab, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Randa Kassab, Frédéric Alexandre. Integration of exteroceptive and
interoceptive information within the hippocampus: a computational study.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2015, ￿10.3389/fn- sys.2015.00087￿.
￿hal-01237876￿

HAL Id: hal-01237876

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01237876

Submitted on 3 Dec 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

ORIGINAL RESEARCH published: 05 June 2015 doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00087

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information within the
hippocampus: a computational study

Randa Kassab 1, 2, 3* and Frédéric Alexandre 1, 2, 3

1 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France, 2 LaBRI, UMR 5800, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, Bordeaux INP, Université de
Bordeaux, Talence, France, 3 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives,
UMR 5293, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, Université de
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France

Many episodic memory studies have critically implicated the hippocampus
in the rapid binding of sensory information from the perception of the
external environment, reported by exteroception. Other structures in the
medial temporal lobe, especially the amygdala, have been more
speciﬁcally linked with emotional dimension of episodic memories,
reported by interoception. The hippocampal projection to the amygdala is
proposed as a substrate important for the formation of
extero-interoceptive associations, allowing adaptive behaviors based on
past experiences. Recently growing evidence suggests that hippocampal
activity observed in a wide range of behavioral tasks could reﬂect
associations between exteroceptive patterns and their emotional
valences. The hippocampal computational models, therefore, need to be
updated to elaborate better interpretation of hippocampal-dependent
behaviors. In earlier models, interoceptive features, if not neglected,
are bound together with other exteroceptive features through
autoassociative learning mechanisms. This way of binding integrates both
kinds of features at the same level, which is not always suitable for
example in the case of pattern completion. Based on the anatomical and
functional heterogeneity along the septotemporal and transverse axes of
the hippocampus, we suggest instead that distinct hippocampal subregions
may be engaged in the representation of these different types of
information, each stored apart in autoassociative memories but linked
together in a heteroassociative way. The model is developed within the
hard constraint of rapid, even single trial, learning of episodic
memories. The performance of the model is assessed quantitatively and
its resistance to interference is demonstrated through a series of
numerical experiments. An experiment of reversal learning in patients
with amnesic cognitive impairment is also reproduced.

Keywords: episodic memory, single-trial behaviors

learning, binding, valence,

interference, hippocampal-dependent

1.  Introduction

Since Tulving’s (1972) proposal to consider the concept of episodic
memory as a speciﬁc form of declarative memory that allows us to
explicitly remember individually experienced events within their
context, a consensus has been emerging that the hippocampus, a medial
temporal lobe structure, is crucially involved in the encoding, storage
and retrieval of spatial and nonspatial

Edited by: Vassilis Cutsuridis, Foundation for Research and Technology -
Hellas, Greece

Reviewed by: Ehren Lee Newman, Boston University, USA Toshikazu Samura,
Yamaguchi University, Japan

*Correspondence: Randa Kassab, INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200 Avenue de
la Vieille Tour, 33405 Talence, France randakassab@gmail.com

Received: 22 January 2015 Accepted: 22 May 2015 Published: 05 June 2015

Citation: Kassab R and Alexandre F (2015) Integration of exteroceptive
and interoceptive information within the hippocampus: a computational
study. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 9:87. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00087

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

1

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

episodic memories (Cohen and Eichenbaum, 1993; Eichenbaum et al., 2012;
Rolls, 2013). Equally, a number of emotional and instrumental behaviors
show a similar dependence on the hippocampus (Kennedy and Shapiro, 2009;
Shohamy et al., 2009; Eichenbaum et al., 2012; Maren, 2014). Memory of
the context in which a reward or punishment has been received can become
reactivated through explicit or implicit recall processes (Lisman and
Redish, 2009). This reactivation is thought of as a prospective use of
episodic memory traces for anticipating future events and selecting
strategic actions (Lee et al., 2006; Shohamy et al., 2009). In both
cases, the speciﬁc contribution of the hippocampus is related to its
unique ability to rapidly learn and use bindings of arbitrary relations
among separate perceptual features of an experience (Cohen and
Eichenbaum, 1993; O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001). This binding has often been
considered to be ﬂexible in the sense that established memories can be
reactivated by related retrieval cues in novel situations that are
diﬀerent from the original situation in which learning took place. It
has been suggested that all hippocampal subregions [dentate gyrus (DG),
CA3, and CA1] are important for the processing of episodic memory, with
each subregion mediating distinct but interdependent computations, e.g.,
pattern separation in the DG (Leutgeb et al., 2007; Rolls, 2013),
pattern completion in CA3 (Rolls, 2013), matching and novelty detection
in CA1 (Hasselmo et al., 1996). Processing of spatial and non-spatial
information, however, reveals the existence of a functional segregation
along the transverse hippocampal axis in CA1 (Tamamaki and Nojyo, 1995),
and, more recently, in CA3 as well (Nakamura et al., 2013). Recent
studies have also drawn attention to the fact that CA3 is not a uniform
network with completely random connections (de Almeida et al., 2007;
Witter, 2007; Bush et al., 2010; Nolan et al., 2011; Kesner, 2013).
Three subregions, CA3a, b, and c, are usually identiﬁed. Both CA3a and
CA3b (close to CA1) have strong recurrent connections and relatively few
connections with CA1, whereas CA3c (close to the DG) has relatively few
recurrent connections but sends strong projections to CA1 (Hunsaker et
al., 2008).

Strong evidence for functional diﬀerentiation along the septotemporal
axis has also been derived from anatomical, behavioral, and gene
expression studies (Moser and Moser, 1998; Thompson et al., 2008;
Fanselow and Dong, 2010). The dorsal/septal and ventral/temporal poles
of the hippocampus diﬀer strikingly in their aﬀerent and eﬀerent
connections to cortical and subcortical structures. The dorsal
hippocampus has—via the entorhinal cortex (EC)—bidirectional
connectivity with various cortical regions known to be implicated in the
processing of visuospatial information, whereas the ventral hippocampus
is more strongly connected to regions implicated in emotional and
motivational behaviors, such as hypothalamus, prefrontal cortex (PFC),
amygdala and insular cortex (van Groen and Wyss, 1990; Pitkänen et al.,
2000; Cenquizca and Swanson, 2007). Consistent with this pattern of
connectivity, dorsal hippocampal lesions have been found to disrupt
spatial memory whereas ventral lesions alter stress and emotional
functions (Henke, 1990; Moser et al., 1995; Kjelstrup et al., 2002). At
the moment evidence grows in support of a more reﬁned division

of the septotemporal axis of the hippocampus (Thompson et al., 2008;
Bast et al., 2009; Strange et al., 2014).

The hippocampus and its associated functions have been extensively
studied in modeling works. To date, however, it has been proved diﬃcult
to render hippocampal models compatible with both episodic memory and
other cognitive functions that involve volitional and reﬂex motor
responses (e.g., classical conditioning Gluck et al., 2003). Models that
underlie episodic memory should be able to rapidly encode neural
representations of single experiences, but models that seek to explain
hippocampal involvement in emotional and behavioral tasks require many
training trials for learning to be eﬀective (O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001).
These later roughly fall into one of two categories as described below.

In the ﬁrst category are models based on the assumption that the role of
the hippocampus is restricted to the association or binding of sensory
features that depend on the perception of the external environment
(exteroception; see Table 1). They take the view that the formation of
extero-interoceptive associations lies exclusively in the change in the
synaptic strength of extrinsic connections between the hippocampus and
other emotion- related structures, like the amygdala (LeDoux, 2007),
especially its basolateral nucleus (BLA) (Eichenbaum et al., 2012),
relying on error-driven learning mechanisms (Schmajuk and DiCarlo, 1992;
Meeter et al., 2005). This kind of learning appears to be consistent
with the slow acquisition of various conditioned behaviors, but does not
seem to delineate a complete picture of the functional role of the
hippocampus. A number of context- dependent behaviors change as the
result of a single, past experience. For example, (Wiltgen et al., 2006)
demonstrated that contextual fear learning can be acquired after a
single conditioning trial when the hippocampus is intact. Rapid
behavioral reversal in early extinction trials is likely to be driven

TABLE 1 | Glossary.

Term

Description

Exteroception

The perception of environmental stimuli originating outside of the body,
e.g., visual, acoustic, or tactile stimuli.

Interoception

The perception of the body’s internal state through the processing of
signals arising from within the body, e.g., blood pressure, heart beats,
etc. Interoceptive features may reﬂect the emotional valence, arousal
and other somatic states.

Valence

Arousal

Valence- overload

One of the most commonly described dimensions of emotions that ranges
from highly positive to highly negative according to how pleasant or
unpleasant a stimulus might be.

The activation dimension that ranges from calm to excitement.

A condition that occurs when a stimulus or a cue is simultaneously
associated to different, sometimes contradictory, valences.

Valence- overload interference

A decrement in the ability of a memory system to reliably remember
previously formed associations between exteroceptive stimuli and their
emotional valences.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

2

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

by the hippocampus (Shohamy et al., 2009). It is suggested by the same
token that the hippocampus may be involved in the immediate recovery of
fear responses as observed after extinction in the amygdala (Hobin et
al., 2006). These data, together with the high connectivity of the
hippocampus with interoceptive perceptual systems (Pitkänen et al.,
2000; Craig, 2009), raise the possibility to extend the rapid binding in
the hippocampus to capture interoceptive features of episodic memories.

it

Now,

is known from neurophysiological data that hippocampal activity is
related to the valence (e.g., reward, neutral, or punishment) of
experiences. There is evidence that CA3 contains a representation of
reward-place associations that may be used to remember goals available
at diﬀerent locations (Rolls and Xiang, 2005). Selective neuronal
responses to reward delivery have been recorded in the hippocampus
(Smith and Mizumori, 2006) and in the EC (Sugase-Miyamoto and Richmond,
2007). Furthermore, activity in CA1 has been observed to signal
learning-related prediction errors in reference to past experiences
(Wirth et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2012).

The second category of models is coherent with these ﬁndings, being
developed with a consideration of interoceptive features, speciﬁcally
emotional valences, as a relevant part of episodic memories (Gluck and
Myers, 1993; O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001; Moustafa et al., 2009; Rolls,
2010). A “ﬂat” representation which concatenates all the perceived
sensory features, both exteroceptive and interoceptive, is used and
stored in a single autoassociative network which supports pattern
completion. These models have proved to be eﬀective for valence
prediction and to account for a wide range of classical conditioning
tasks. However, as others before, neural representations are gradually
shaped over a signiﬁcant number of training trials, a compelling reason
why they are thought to be incompatible with the widely held view of
single-trial hippocampal acquisition of episodic memories and other
forms of one-experience context-dependent tasks (Gluck et al., 2003).
Yet, all of these models, mostly oriented toward hippocampal involvement
in adaptive behaviors, have not attempted to explicitly ascertain their
performance under diﬀerent recall conditions. The quality of valence
prediction was tested using all of the previously encountered
exteroceptive cues associated with learning. However, recall is usually
believed to occur when subsets of exteroceptive cues of past experiences
are reactivated. Simply binding extero-interoceptive features onto a
single pattern of activity as proposed above implies that, under recall
conditions with partial exteroceptive cues, a pattern completion process
would concurrently ﬁll in what is missing from exteroceptive and
interoceptive patterns. This may result in impaired performance on
valence prediction relative to that under full-cue recall conditions.

are

learned both within and outside

In sum, at the biological level of analysis, a great deal of evidence
exists to support the view that extero-interoceptive associations the
hippocampus. So high plasticity in the hippocampus may represent the
neural substrate for the rapid acquisition of some
hippocampally-dependent behaviors, even in a single trial as may occur
in episodic memory. Other more slowly acquired behaviors may depend on
incremental learning involving other brain structures, like the
amygdala, but remain

nevertheless dependent on the hippocampus as a primary source of
contextual inputs. On the other hand, to our knowledge, no computational
models have been developed to explain how extero-interoceptive
associations might be rapidly formed within the hippocampus. Indeed,
single-trial learning is a hard learning problem, particularly when
emotional memories have to be considered (Mather, 2009). Take, for
example, the case of three emotionally valenced patterns AB+, AC−, and
BD−. It is possible to store each of these patterns by strengthening
associative links between its three constituent features. However,
exteroceptive features, like A and B, which are shared among positively
and negatively valenced patterns, will become paired with both positive
and negative valences. This will, of course, lead to a wrong prediction
of AB valence when presented as a retrieval cue to the network. This
type of interference, which we will refer to as “valence overload,” can
be solved by incremental learning through a series of presentations of
the set of input patterns in order to gradually discover their latent
structure interfering patterns. representations of and adjust neural The
computational challenge that needs to be addressed, however, is how to
go about doing so under the condition of rapid learning which may be the
natural province of the hippocampus.

to address

independent

The computational model that we describe in this paper is the rapid,
one-trial, binding of the ﬁrst extero-interoceptive features within the
hippocampus. In line the with the anatomical and functional
heterogeneity of hippocampus, our model is based around an integrated
network of interconnected auto- and heteroassociative memories. Instead
of the purely autoassociative way of binding proposed by previous
models, neural assemblies representing exteroceptive sensory inputs and
their emotional valences are considered as two sets of in
autoassociative memories that are linked in a heteroassociative way.
This implies a distinction between two speciﬁc forms of interference,
namely “pattern overload” and “valence overload,” that can occur
respectively at the level of the autoassociative and heteroassociative
memories. Pattern overload has been extensively addressed under the
assumption that the DG implements pattern separation mechanisms to
ensure the successful encoding of distinct memory traces in the CA3
autoassociative network (Rolls, 2010). Therefore, we will focus
primarily here on demonstrating the ability of the model to rapidly link
exteroceptive patterns and their emotional valences while avoiding
valence-overload interference.

features, each stored apart

2.  Materials and Methods

2.1. Network Architecture and Computational Principles The major
component of the proposed model is the hippocampal network (Figure 1).
The input-output relations between the hippocampal network and other
brain areas are implemented as distinct patterns of activity across
populations of cells in the entorhinal cortex (EC). The computational
implementation details can be found in Table 2.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

3

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 1 | The architecture of the hippocampal model. (A) General
schematic diagram showing the input-output relationships that the model
is hypothesized to have with other brain regions. Black arrows indicate
ﬂow of exteroceptive information while blue arrows indicate ﬂow of
interoceptive information among the identiﬁed regions. Abbreviations:
PHC, parahippocampal cortex; PRC, perirhinal cortex. (B) The hippocampal
model implemented in this study. Network inputs correspond to the
activities of cells in the entorhinal cortex, which respond to
exteroceptive features as well as interoceptive, valence,

states related to external stimuli. Black lines denote the basic circuit
of the model while blue lines denote changes in circuitry mediated by
valence-associated cells (blue) following the detection of
valence-overload interference (red arrow). Autoassociative and
heteroassociative connectivities between hippocampal cells are denoted
respectively by bidirectional dashed lines and simple dashed lines
without arrows. Inhibitory connections between valence cells are denoted
by lines ended with circles. Stable non-plastic connections, both
excitatory and inhibitory, are denoted by solid lines.

The model receives two kinds of sensory inputs, a(e) and a(i), reﬂecting
exteroceptive and interoceptive patterns of activity of aﬀerent input
from the EC (Figure 1A). Interoceptive patterns may reﬂect the emotional
valence (pleasantness of the events), arousal (the intensity of emotion
provoked by the experienced events) and other somatic states (e.g.,
hunger or satiety) of external stimuli. However, for simplicity, we
focus on the valence of the presented stimuli but all computations in
the model generalize trivially to other interoceptive features.

Two autoassociative networks are considered in the model. They receive
independently exteroceptive and interoceptive input patterns, a(e) and
a(i), via one-to-one connectivity with

EC cells. The ﬁrst network operates, as it is usually the case, to link
exteroceptive features of a given stimulus by strengthening recurrent
synaptic weights, w(e) , between co-active cells. The cells ij in the
second autoassociative network serve a similar function for
interoceptive features via their recurrent connections, w(i) ij .

In addition, the model includes a small number of ordered groups of
intermediate valence cells that receive stimulus valence from the same
interoceptive pathways. As long as no inhibition is exerted on the ﬁrst
group of intermediate valence cells, its cells can be directly activated
by interoceptive inputs to the model and are therefore considered as the
primary valence cells.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

4

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

TABLE 2 | Model equations for learning and recall processes.

Equation

RECALL

Description

ˆa(e) j = H(

n

X i=1

ij a(e) w(e)

i −

n

X i=1

a(e) i

)

H(x) =  

1,

0,

if x ≥ 0

if x < 0

The exteroceptive autoassociative network is presented a retrieval cue,
a(e) ∈ {0, 1}n, from the entorhinal cortex (EC). The retrieval activity
pattern ˆa(e) ∈ {0, 1}n is obtained by summing dendritic input from the
recurrent connections for each cell, j, and applying a ﬁring threshold θ
=

.

n i

˜a(e) i

P

 l = ˆy(v) y(v) l ∧ ¯Il n ˆy(v) l = H(

X j=1

w(e−v) jl

Il =

p×m

_ i=1

Iil ˆy(v) i

ˆa(e) j −

n

X j

ˆa(e) j

)

The output of the exteroceptive autoassociative network, ˆa(e), drives
retrieval in the heteroassociative network. An intermediate valence
cell, l, can ﬁre (y(v) l = 1) only if the dendritic sum of its
excitatory inputs exceeds the speciﬁed threshold (ˆy(v) l = 1) and if it
does not receive inhibitory inputs from other valence cells that have
already ﬁred (¯Ij = 1 or Ij = 0).

ˆa(i) j = H(

w(i) ij

˜a(i) i −

m

X i=1

˜a(i) i

)

˜a(i) k =

w(v−i) ik

y(v) i

m

X i=1 p×m

_ i=1

LEARNING w(e) ij

L1

(t + 1) = w(e) ij

(t) ∨ (a(e)

i ∧ a(e)

j

The activity of the intermediate valence cells serves as input to the
interoceptive autoassociative network through prewired connections,
w(v−i) . The initial input is denoted by ˜a(i) and ˆa(i) speciﬁes the
retrieved output, via recurrent connections, w(i) ij .

ik

)

The activity state of n cells in the exteroceptive autoassociative
network is determined only by afferent inputs from the EC, a(e) ∈ {0,
1}n. The recurrent synaptic weight w(e) ij between two cells i and j is
clipped at 1 if both cells are active; otherwise, no change occurs.
Initially, w(e) ij

(0) = 0.

R1

R2

R3

L2

L3

ij (t + 1) = w(i) w(i)

ij (t) ∨ (a(i)

i ∧ a(i)

j

)

i ∧ h(v)

j

ij

j ∧ ¯Ij

(t) ∨ (a(e)

(t + 1) = w(e−v)

w(e−v) ij h(v) j = x(v) x(v) = (m1a(i), m2a(i), …, mpa(i)) 2 , …, g(v)
y(v) = (g(v) p )

1 , g(v)

a(i) ∈ {0, 1}m speciﬁes interoceptive, valence, activity pattern from
the EC and w(i) interoceptive autoassociative network. Initially, w(i)

ij (0) = 0.

ij speciﬁes synaptic weights of the

)

The intermediate valence cells are organized into p groups of m cells.
As long as no inhibition is exerted on the primary group, its cells can
be activated directly by interoceptive inputs from the EC (m1 = 1). The
interoceptive input, a(i), on the remaining p − 1 groups of valence
cells is gated by being multiplied by mk signals that coincide with the
detection of interference (4k−1 = 1). The interference condition veriﬁes
when the distance (HD) between the retrieval activity, y(v) k ) and the
interoceptive activity from the EC (a(v)) j exceeds a threshold v.
Initially, w(e−i)

, across the valence cells of a group k (g(v)

(0) = 0.

ij

m1 = 1, mk∈[2,p] =  

1,

if 4k−1 = 1

0, otherwise

4k =

m

X i=1

g(v) ki

 > 0 ∧ HD(g(v)

k , a(v)) > v

Interoceptive inputs on the cells in the other groups, which are termed
associated cells, are conditional. This means that interoceptive inputs
can not evoke postsynaptic activity within the associated cells unless a
concomitant signal mk emanating from a precedent group of valence cells
is applied. The occurrence of mk signals coincides with the detection of
interference at the level of the activity pattern of the corresponding
group of valence cells (cf. Section 2.2 and Equation L3 in Table 2).

The cells within the same group of intermediate valence cells are not
interconnected but inhibitory connections, Iij, exist between cells
belonging to diﬀerent groups. These connections are not plastic, they
are prewired such that an inhibitory connection from cell i to cell j
exists (Iij = 1) if the two cells belong respectively to diﬀerent
groups, k and l, and l precedes k. Thus, each group of associated cells,
once activated, exerts a shunting-type inhibitory eﬀect on its preceding
groups including the primary group of valence cells, and at most valence
cells in one group can be active at a time.

The coupling of exteroceptive sensory information to their emotional
valences occurs at the level of heteroassociative links, w(e−v) ,
between the exteroceptive autoassociative network and ij intermediate
valence cells. These latter provide, in turn, direct excitatory input to
the interoceptive autoassociative network through prewired connections,
w(v−i) . Speciﬁcally, a connection (w(v−i) ik of valence; otherwise,
w(v−i)

= 1) is wired if cells i and k are sensitive to the same kind

= 0.

ij

ik

The standard binary version of the Willshaw associative network
(Steinbuch, 1961; Willshaw et al., 1969) is used as a basis to simulate
both auto- and heteroassociative memory functions in the model. It is
one of the most eﬃcient associative memory networks as long as the
patterns to be stored are sparse (Graham and Willshaw, 1997), and is
often used for modeling neural circuits across brain regions (Palm,
2013), and widely adopted for estimating the potential storage capacity
in the hippocampus (Bennett et al., 1994; Dubreuil et al., 2014).

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

5

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

The Willshaw’s heteroassociative network is a feedforward network with
two layers of McCulloch-Pitts binary threshold cells. The n cells of the
input layer are fully connected to m cells in the output layer through
modiﬁable binary synapses, wij ∈ {0, 1}n×m. The network can store M
pairs of binary patterns presented at the input and output layers ({(xµ,
yµ)}, xµ ∈ {0, 1}n, yµ ∈ {0, 1}m, µ = 1 . . . M), by setting synaptic
strengths according to a clipped version of Hebbian learning: a single
coincidence of presynaptic and postsynaptic activity (xµ i = 1 and yµ j
= 1) is enough to change the synaptic weight wij from 0 to 1, while
further co-activations do not induce further changes.

For identical input and output patterns (xµ = yµ and n = m), it is
trivial to conﬁgure the Willshaw’s network to act autoassociatively as a
single-layer network with n cells connected through recurrent synaptic
connections, wij ∈ {0, 1}n×n.

P

When the network is used for recall by presenting a cue pattern ˜x on
the input layer, a pattern of output activity can n be recalled if
dendritic potential (sj = i=1 wij ˜xi) exceeds a global ﬁring threshold
θ . A well-selected value of the threshold is important for successful
recall. Here we use the classical threshold as proposed by Willshaw et
al. (1969), that is, the n number of active cells in the input (θ = i=1
˜xi). This strategy is simple and biologically plausible as it can be
implemented, for example, through feedforward inhibition (Knoblauch et
al., 2010). The quality of a recalled pattern can be assessed according
to its diﬀerence from the originally stored pattern. Here we use Hamming
distance as a basis for the assessment of recall quality. Hamming
distance between two binary patterns x and y, HD(x, y), is computed as
the number of elements that diﬀer between the patterns. For example, if
x = (0 1 1 1 0) and y = (1 1 0 1 0) then HD = 2.

P

2.2. Storage and Recall The model’s dynamics are largely based on the
assumption— shared by many other hippocampal models (Hasselmo et al.,
1996; Meeter et al., 2004)—that the hippocampus generates its own
novelty signal and uses it as a basis for self-aligned transitions
between storage and recall modes. The essential idea is that when novel
patterns are presented to the hippocampus an inhibitory eﬀect is exerted
on the septum leading to strong increase of acetylcholine (ACh) release
from septal cholinergic projections to the hippocampus. The increase in
Ach appears to give rise to speciﬁc network dynamics that favor response
to aﬀerent inputs while decreasing the synaptic transmission at
intrinsic modiﬁable synapses during learning (Hasselmo, 2006). The model
is simulated in discrete time steps, that is, the activity states of
cells/synapses at time step t determine the next states at time t + 1.
The mathematical details of the model equations that govern the learning
and recall processes are presented in Table 2.

The recall process starts by presenting the exteroceptive
autoassociative network with a particular pattern of activity, a(e),
from the EC. The activity states of cells in the autoassociative network
are then updated according to the total recurrent excitatory activity
they receive. This yields the output pattern, ˆa(e), which corresponds
to pattern completion of exteroception. Similarly, the activity, ˆa(e),
propagates along heteroassociative

links and elicits activation of groups of intermediate valence cells,
y(v). Due to the inhibitory interactions between these groups, at most
valence cells in one group can become active. This activation can
trigger recall in the interoceptive autoassociative network and a third
pattern of activity, ˆa(i), emerges at the output of the network which
corresponds to valence prediction (Figure 1).

Just after the completion of the exteroceptive pattern coming from the
entorhinal cortex (EC), a novelty-detection process takes place to
compare the retrieved pattern, ˆa(e), to the actual pattern in the EC,
a(e). The mismatch/novelty condition occurs when the Hamming distance
between the two patterns exceeds a pre-speciﬁed threshold (HD(e) > e).
If the EC activity pattern corresponds to the retrieved pattern, valence
prediction can be signaled to other brain regions such as the amygdala.

Upon receipt of interoceptive information, a similar process occurs to
evaluate prediction error in terms of Hamming distance between actual
a(i) and predicted values ˆa(i). Likewise, novelty occurs when the
distance exceeds a pre-speciﬁed threshold (HD(i) > v).

Errors in valence prediction can be related to two separate factors: (1)
It may be that the model does not have any prediction for exteroceptive
cues (if novel exteroceptive cues) or (2) may stem from overload
interference at the level of heteroassociative links between
exteroceptive patterns and their associated valences (valence overload).
In the ﬁrst case, it would be suﬃcient to store the new inputs and their
association to be retained and recalled later. Direct learning of new
associations in the second case will continue to interfere with the
recall of older, valence-related information.

Pi y(v)

The model deals with valence-overload interference by monitoring
activity of intermediate valence cells, y(v), during recall. If any
activity is observed among intermediate valence i > 0) in response to
exteroceptive cues a matching cells ( process takes place to determine
whether this activity matches valence-related activity in the EC. A
mismatch (HD(v) > v) signals a potential interference to a successive
group of associated valence cells that become able to respond to
valence-related inputs from the EC and rapidly silence valence cells
that were active in preceding groups.

Both exteroceptive inputs with high novelty (HD(e) > e) and valence
prediction errors (HD(i) > v) can induce dynamics that favor learning of
new inputs, otherwise the model settles in recall mode.

During learning, excitatory intrinsic synaptic transmission is removed
and activity in the model is purely driven by aﬀerent inputs from the
EC, a(e) and a(i). Synaptic weights at the level of auto- and
heteroassociative networks are then updated according to Equations
(L1–L3) in Table 2.

As an example, Figure 2 shows how the model deals with the case of the
three emotional patterns (AB+, AC−, BD−) discussed above. Following the
encoding of the three patterns, the presentation of AB will activate
cells involved in coding positive and negative valence. This pattern of
activity triggers a mismatch signal allowing the activation of a new
group of associated cells by EC aﬀerent inputs. Then, a new encoding of
AB+ proceeds with the new associated cells. A subsequent presentation of
AB

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

6

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

Hamming distance equal to zero, while error means a Hamming distance
greater than zero.

To ensure that the eﬀects observed in the model stem from valence
overload interference at the level of heteroassociative links, the model
is tested under the assumption of perfect storage and recall within the
autoassociative networks (pattern overload interference can not occur at
the level of autoassociative memories). That is, the memory load is kept
low to ensure an error-free recall of stored exteroceptive patterns from
full cues.

We start with a generic setup to examine the behavior of the model under
a number of diﬀerent conditions (such as the number of stored patterns,
and recall under full-cue vs. partial-cue conditions). Our model is
contrasted to a standard autoassociative model, i.e., a single
autoassociative network in which both extero- and interoceptive inputs
are considered as two parts of a single pattern, as well as to a simple
heteroassociative model which can be thought of as a reduced version of
the proposed model without the groups of associated cells.

The simulation experiments are organized in terms of one or more blocks
of trials (Figure 3). A block of n trials consists of one pass through n
extero-interoceptive patterns that are randomly ordered in each block. A
training trial begins with the presentation of an exteroceptive pattern
a(e) as a retrieval cue to drive the recall process in the model. At the
end of this process, two patterns of activity emerge at the output of
the model: ˆa(e) which corresponds to pattern completion of
exteroception, and ˆa(i) which corresponds to valence prediction.
Immediately after that, the original valence pattern, a(i), is delivered
in order to evaluate the performance of the model and determine whether
it is necessary to shift the model into a learning mode to store the
externally presented patterns. Following the end of a given experiment,
errors are recorded over a block of testing trials in which learning is
disabled.

Next, we build upon a two-phase learning paradigm established by
Levy-Gigi et al. (2011) to investigate reversal learning in patients
with amnesic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) which may arise from
hippocampal pathology. The ﬁrst phase is a discrimination learning task
in which participants were presented with four diﬀerent cards containing
a shape representing a cue and a background representing a context. Two
of the cards are associated with positive outcome (winning points)
whereas the others are associated with negative outcome (loosing
points). Acquisition was followed by a reversal phase where an
additional set of 8 new cards was used with two possibilities: A new
card can share the same cue as an original card but appears in a new
context or a new cue can be presented in the original context. The new
cards were associated with the opposite outcome relative to the
discrimination learning phase. The reversal phase was a series of
retention and reversal trials. On retention, the original cards were
presented with the same outcome, whereas cards with a new context or a
new cue were presented on reversal trials. Participants have to learn to
reverse their choice without a change in the relevant feature for a cue
or a context. To simulate this task, we generated three groups of 4
exteroceptive patterns each. One of the 8 active cells is used to encode
the presence of a cue and the others to encode

FIGURE 2 | Illustration of how accumulated learning of emotional stimuli
causes valence interference and how the proposed model attempts to solve
it. (A) Initially, the model is trained on three emotional patterns
(AB+, AC−, BD−) where + indicates positive valence and – denotes
negative valence. Thick solid lines between exteroceptive layer and
valence cells are used to denote learned connections. The ﬁgure shows
that the learning of AC and BD patterns linked irrelevantly the
components of AB to negative valance. (B) Presentation of AB as a
retrieval cue leads to the activation of both cells in the primary group
of valence cells. After the receipt of the actual valence (+) of the
pattern (AB), prediction error at the output of the model causes its
dynamics to favor learning, and concurrently the false pattern of
activity in the primary group of valence cell triggers a mismatch signal
to the next group of associated cells (red). This allows the positive
valence-speciﬁc cell in that group to ﬁre while cells in the primary
group fall silent by inhibitory effects of the associated group of
valence cells.

will activate that associated cells which, in turn, inhibit preceding
valence cells allowing an accurate prediction of its associated valence.

2.3. Simulation Methods To validate the model outlined above, several
simulations were run. The stimulated model contains 300 cells for the
exteroceptive autoassociative network, 3 cells for the interoceptive,
valence, autoassociative network. The intermediate valence cells are
organized into one primary group of 3 cells and 4 groups of 3 associated
cells.

The entorhinal inputs are provided to the model as two independent
patterns of activity. The exteroceptive inputs are modeled as a randomly
constructed pattern of activity across 300 binary cells. The number of
active cells was held ﬁxed at 8 (≃ log2(300), a maximal level of density
allowing for a successful recall in the Willshaw model) except where a
partial cue is used to elicit recall of previously stored information.
To reﬂect the emotional valence associated with exteroceptive patterns,
3 binary cells were used to diﬀerentiate positive, negative and neutral
valence states. One of these cells switches to its active state
according to whether a pleasant (100), unpleasant (010), or neutral
(001) stimulus is present. The novelty-detection thresholds, e and v,
are set to zero, except for simulations described in Section 3.3.

The pattern of activity being recalled at the output of the model
corresponds to both pattern completion of exteroceptive cues and valence
prediction. Therefore, two kinds of recall errors are considered when
evaluating simulation results. One reﬂects the mismatch between the
stored and retrieved activation for exteroceptive patterns. The other
reﬂects the diﬀerence between the predicted and correct valence. In both
cases, errors are deﬁned in terms of Hamming distance. No error implies
a

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

7

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 3 | A trial, as experimentally designed, is composed of three
phases. The ﬁrst phase is a recall process triggered by the presentation
of an exteroceptive pattern, a(e), as a retrieval cue at the input of
the model. At the end of this phase, two patterns of activity emerge at
the output of the model: ˆa(e) corresponding to pattern completion of
exteroception, and ˆa(i)

corresponding to valence prediction. The second phase begins with the
delivery of the original valence pattern, a(i), and two matching
processes take place to compute pattern completion and valence
prediction errors. In the third phase a learning process occurs in case
of error/mismatch, otherwise a correct trial is scored and the next
trial begins.

the presence of a context. No overlap is allowed between cells encoding
for diﬀerent cues or contexts. That is, 8 diﬀerent cells are used to
encode 8 diﬀerent cues and 56 cells are used to encode 8 diﬀerent
contexts. Positive and negative valences are associated with the 12
patterns the same way as described above.

All simulation results reported in the next section are averaged over 20
simulation runs with diﬀerent random patterns, and are presented with a
conﬁdence interval of 95%.

3.  Results

No

between

observed

3.1. Predictive Recall Using Full Exteroceptive Cues In general,
associative networks show a degradation in recall quality as the number
of stored patterns increases. Here we investigate the eﬀect of the
number of stored patterns on valence prediction when no degradation in
recall occurs at the level of exteroceptive patterns. Our model, as well
as standard autoassociative and heteroassociative models, were trained
on blocks of N patterns that were randomly assigned to a positive,
negative or neutral valence. diﬀerences were

standard autoassociative and heteroassociative models. Taken together in
Figure 4A, results show that for a set of 10, 20, and up to 40 patterns
the models make correct prediction. As the number of stored patterns
increases to 50 or more, the models continue to reliably retrieve stored
exteroceptive patterns but prediction errors begin to occur more
frequently, reaching about 25 of a total of 100 patterns. The
explanation lies in the fact that the number of exteroceptive features
far outnumbers that for valence, then interoceptive features are much
more willing to be shared between stored patterns. This suggests that
additional irrelevant connections tend to be strengthened as long as
novel patterns are being stored. On the other hand, our model detects
the eﬀect of such irrelevant connections and attempts to prohibit
interference from occurring by promoting the recruitment of a successive
group of associated cells. Figure 4B shows how prediction errors are
signiﬁcantly reduced after the ﬁrst presentation of patterns and reach
zero after few additional presentations. In particular, at

N = 100 stored patterns, Figure 4C demonstrates that a gradual reduction
in prediction errors is observed across 4 blocks of training trials due
to the detection of a number of potential problems of interference over
each block of trial (Figure 4D). A maximum of two groups of associated
cells is needed to reduce prediction errors to zero (Figure 4E).

3.2. Predictive Recall Using Partial Exteroceptive Cues Despite having
observed in the simulations presented above that recall proceeds in much
the same way in standard autoassociative and heteroassociative models, a
functional diﬀerence is to be expected when valence prediction is done
on the basis of partial exteroceptive cues. In a standard
autoassociative model, pattern completion and valence prediction are
performed concurrently while a heteroassociative model supports
successive recall processes in such a way that valence prediction could
be performed from a full representation of exteroceptive patterns
resulting from pattern completion under partial cue condition. Based on
this, one might predict that autoassociative models would be more prone
to prediction errors than heteroassociative models.

To test

this prediction,

standard autoassociative and heteroassociative models were trained on a
set of 100 patterns that were randomly assigned to a positive, negative
or neutral valence. After training, distinct input patterns were
generated from each of the trained exteroceptive patterns, such that a
ﬁxed number of active cells become quiescent (set to 0). This number was
increased from 1 up to 7 with subsequent testing trials. The partial
patterns were presented to the models and recall performance was
assessed (Figure 5).

Once again, both autoassociative and heteroassociative models produced
the same performance on pattern completion of exteroceptive cues
(Figures 5A,C). Both show a gradual decline in pattern completion as the
number of active cells decreases but, as shown in Figure 5C, pattern
completion is almost perfect (HD ≤ 1) for 1 to 4 cells being silenced or
deleted in the originally trained patterns. This appears to provide a
clear support for the heteroassociative model to

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

8

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 4 | Effect of the number of stored patterns on valence
prediction. (A) Percentage of prediction errors of the standard
autoassociative and heteroassociative models. (B) Percentage of
prediction errors of the proposed model after one to four blocks of
training trials.

(C,D,E) Details on the behavior of the proposed model trained on blocks
of 100 patterns. (C) Prediction errors across 5 blocks of trials. (D)
Rates of interference detection over each block of trials. (E) Number of
groups of associated cells needed to resolve interference across the 5
blocks of trials.

maintain its performance on valence prediction as it was the case
without deletion (Figures 5B,D). These results also agree with the
prediction discussed above, that exteroceptive pattern completion being
performed prior to valence prediction in the heteroassociative model
makes it more accurate than the autoassociative model, even when only a
small number of originally active cells is presented to the model.
Similar functional improvement is observed with the proposed model which
is inherently a heteroassociative model (Figures 5E,F). However, the
improvement is signiﬁcantly larger in the proposed model because its
learning is better even after one presentation of training patterns.

occurred. The valence of these 10 patterns is then randomly repeated or
changed to positive or negative values. The model was retrained on these
patterns to allow it to adapt to valence changes. Subsequently, the
model is tested for valence prediction. As shown in Figure 6, when both
thresholds are set to 2, the model produces prediction errors on about
two-thirds of the trained patterns. The model was not able to detect
changes in valence because exteroceptive patterns were recognized by the
model (HD = 0, see Figure 6B), so no learning has occurred. By contrast,
when valence threshold was set to 0 whatever the value of exteroceptive
threshold, 0 or 2, the model oﬀers an errorless performance due to the
successful detection of valence changes.

is

features

the number of

3.3. Phasing Storage and Recall Since grossly exteroceptive
disproportionate to that of interoceptive features, our model makes use
of two novelty signals to mediate transitions between storage and
retrieval modes. These signals are generated separately at the level of
exteroceptive patterns and their associated valences. In this way the
model can grant more tolerance of exteroceptive errors than
interoceptive errors while being able to distinguish between diﬀerent
conditions where input patterns should be treated as novel.

To illustrate this behavior, the proposed model was initially trained on
a set of 10 patterns that were associated with neutral valence. Whatever
the values of novelty thresholds e and v (e/v = 0/0, 2/2, 2/0), the
model identiﬁed each of these patterns as novel because the diﬀerence at
the level of exteroceptive patterns is much higher (see Figure 6B).
Therefore, learning has

task of Levy-Gigi

3.4. Cue-Context Reversal Learning Similarly to the the al. et proposed
model, as well as the standard autoassociative and heteroassociative
models, are applied to initially acquire a discrimination between a set
of positively or negatively valenced patterns, and then to switch its
choice following a reversal at the level of cues or contexts in the
original patterns. The experimental design of the task is summarized in
Table 3.

(2011),

In the ﬁrst phase of acquisition, the models are repeatedly presented
with the training patterns in the ﬁrst group and valence prediction is
evaluated over four blocks of four trials. As in previous simulations,
the order of training trials is randomized within each block. There was
no diﬀerence in the performance of the three models during the
acquisition phase (Figure 7A). All the three models make correct valence
prediction after a single exposure to the training patterns.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

9

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 5 | Recall performance using partial cues. (A) Pattern completion
performance, deﬁned as the percentage of retrieved patterns that differ
from the stored patterns by one element at least, in a standard
autoassociative model (M). (B) Valence prediction in the standard
autoassociative model and the heteroassociative model

(S) and a heteroassociative model
(T) 

(M). (C,D) Pattern completion and

Valence prediction performances, deﬁned in terms of Hamming distance
between the stored and retrieved patterns in the standard (M). (E,F) (S)
and the heteroassociative model autoassociative model (M+ACs, with ACs
stands Valence prediction in the proposed model for associated cells)
after one block of training trials (E) and after 4 blocks of training
trials (F).

In the reversal phase, the models are exposed to new training patterns
from the second and third groups, in addition to the old ones. The 12
training patterns are presented repeatedly four times in random order
across four blocks of trials. In the initial stage after this reversal,
valence prediction errors drastically increase for all the three models
(Figure 7A). This is quite expected because more than 66% of the
training patterns are new. It is

also obvious from the results of Figure 7A that valence prediction
errors are made for old patterns as well. This reﬂects the fact that
heteroassociative connections are irrelevantly strengthened between the
original patterns and valences of new patterns. The proposed model
detects all interference problems on the ﬁrst two blocks of training
trials after reversal and engages accordingly one group of
valence-associated cells to deal with interference eﬀects

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

10

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 6 | Effect of novelty thresholds on the performance of the model.
(A) Errors in valence prediction for different values of exteroceptive
(e) and interoceptive (v) thresholds. (B) Hamming distance

between input and output patterns before and after valence changes.
Hamming distance is calculated in overall (G) and separately for
exteroception (E) and valence (V).

TABLE 3 | The experimental design of the task of Levy-Gigi et
al. (2011).

Training patterns

Task

Group 1

Group 2

Group 3

Phase 1

Phase 2

(Original)

(Cue reversal)

(Context reversal)

(Acquisition)

(Retention

A1+

B2+

C3−

D4−

E1−

F2−

G3+

H4+

A5−

B6−

C7+

D8+

Group1

and Reversal)

Group1

Group2

Group3

A–H refer to eight cue shapes, 1–8, eight contexts, + and − indicate
respectively positive and negative valences.

(Figure 7B). The standard autoassociative and heteroassociative models,
on the other hand, show impaired valence prediction performance on the
old patterns after learning the new ones. This impairment persists over
repeated trials since old exteroceptive patterns become associated with
both positive and negative valence values.

4.  Discussion

4.1. Autoassociative and Heteroassociative Hippocampal Networks The
model proposed in this paper is developed to elucidate neural mechanisms
that might underlie the rapid, one-trial learning of
extero-interoceptive associations in the hippocampus. The binding of
exteroceptive features is accomplished, as it is usually the case,
through a separate autoassociative network, subserving pattern
completion of exteroceptive patterns. Along with this ﬁrst
autoassociative memory, a second one is employed to serve a similar
function for valence features. The two autoassociative networks are
interconnected through heteroassociative links, allowing ﬂexible
interactions between the exteroceptive stimulus patterns and their
associated emotional valences.

FIGURE 7 | Simulation results of the reversal learning task of Levy-Gigi
et al. (2011). (A) Performance on valence prediction before and after
cue and context reversal learning using the standard autoassociative and
heteroassociative models (S/M) and the proposed model (M+ACs, with ACs
stands for associated cells). (B) Number of groups of associated cells
needed by the proposed model during acquisition and reversal phases.

synapses

By evidence of associative synaptic plasticity at most of the
hippocampal (Andersen et al., 2007), auto- and heteroassociative
networks have already been validated as prototypical models of the
hippocampus. While autoassociative learning has long been ascribed to
CA3 because of its recurrent connections (Marr, 1971), heteroassociative
learning has been reported to occur at the Schaﬀer collaterals
projecting from CA3 to CA1 (Miyata

the mnemonic function of

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

11

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

et al., 2013), at CA3 backprojections on hilar mossy cells and DG
granule cells (Lisman and Otmakhova, 2001). Recently, the functional
homogeneity of CA3 has been called into question (de Almeida et al.,
2007; Witter, 2007; Hunsaker et al., 2008; Thompson et al., 2008; Bush
et al., 2010). The CA3 subregions (CA3a, b, and c) have been reported to
exhibit distinct anatomical and neurophysiological characteristics. In
particular, Samura et al. (2008) have proposed, based on the location
dependency of the recurrent collaterals of CA3, that both CA3a and CA3b
act as autoassociative memories while CA3c acts as heteroassociative
memory.

It has been argued that heteroassociative plasticity may underlie the
learning of memory sequences in the hippocampus (Lisman and Otmakhova,
2001; Samura et al., 2008). It is also plausible that the
heteroassociative properties of hippocampal synapses could serve, as
suggested by our model, to facilitate binding between diﬀerent kinds of
information that may be mediated by diﬀerent regions and circuitry in
the hippocampus. Some aspects in favor of this possibility will be
discussed in Section 4.2 below.

As opposite to the purely autoassociative way of binding proposed by
previous models (e.g., O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001; Rolls, 2010), our model
proposes that pattern completion of exteroceptive patterns occurs prior
to the prediction of their emotional valences. This allows, as
demonstrated by the simulations in Figure 5, for more accurate
predictions under partial-cue recall conditions. Note that the validity
of this principle is evident for extero-interoceptive associations
formed outside the hippocampus. Projections from the hippocampus,
including those to the amygdala (Pitkänen et al., 2000), arise mainly
from CA1, that is, after completion of exteroceptive patterns in CA3.
This may be the reason why the eﬀect of partial- cue removal on valence
prediction has not received attention in experimental studies. While
this is accepted in principle, such studies would be extremely useful to
determine what type of binding is used to integrate exteroceptive and
interoceptive information within the hippocampus. A good argument in
favor of the heteroassociative connectivity can be obtained if the
accuracy on valence prediction does not diﬀer signiﬁcantly as the number
of available cues decreases (up to 50% according to our simulation
results).

4.2. How does Interoceptive Information Reach the Hippocampus? It is
known that sensory information from most unimodal and polymodal
associative cortical areas arrives at the superﬁcial layers of the EC
and passes to the hippocampus via the perforant path (de Curtis and
Paré, 2004). The axons of the perforant path arise mainly in layers II
and III of the EC; layer II neurons project directly to the DG and CA3,
while layer III neurons project to CA1 hippocampal region (Andersen et
al., 2007). In primates, spatial information is conveyed to the
superﬁcial layers of the EC by the parahippocampal cortex (PHC) whereas
non-spatial information is conveyed by the perirhinal cortex (PRC).
According to this view, PRC which receives important projections from
the insular cortex (Craig, 2009) might also convey interoceptive
information to the hippocampus (Figure 1).

Notably, the transfer of sensory inputs from PRC to EC is subject to
long-range feedforward inhibition (de Curtis and Paré, 2004;
Apergis-Schoute et al., 2007), that has been shown to be counteracted by
BLA glutamatergic projections to PRC and EC (Paz and Paré, 2013). Such
eﬀect was observed, for example, in the case of the experiment reported
by Paz et al. (2006) when a reward is unexpectedly delivered, but
attenuated with learning when rewards occur as predicted. This suggests
that BLA activity may facilitate the transmission of emotional
information under certain conditions to the hippocampus (de Curtis and
Paré, 2004).

In addition, unlike exteroceptive information, alternate pathways may
provide a route for interoceptive features to reach the hippocampus
(Andersen et al., 2007). Direct projections from the insular and
orbitofrontal cortices terminate in the deep layers of the EC but they
may contribute to the perforant path through intrinsic deep to
superﬁcial projections in the entorhinal cortex. The amygdala, which may
relay valence related information, exclusively targets cells in layer
III of the EC (Canto et al., 2008). Both CA3 and CA1, but not the DG,
receive direct projection from BLA. The septum, which interacts closely
with limbic structures, is another potential source of interoceptive
information that may reach all subdivisions of formation via
ﬁmbria-fornix pathway. This pattern of neuroanatomical connectivity
argues for a relative segregation between the processing of
exteroceptive and interoceptive information in the hippocampus. It is
also possible that distinct types of extero-interoceptive associations
are mediated by diﬀerent heteroassociative networks in the hippocampus.

the hippocampal

The anatomical and neurophysiological characteristics of CA3 make it
attractive as a candidate for the locus where one- trial associations
might be formed between diverse exteroceptive and interoceptive inputs.
The architecture of the model presented in this paper represents a minor
departure from the purely autoassociative models of CA3—since only a
small fraction of cells encoding valence are isolated from other cells
binding exteroceptive features in a homogeneous autoassociative network.
We assume that CA3a, where recurrent connections is the best ﬁtted to
the exteroceptive are most prevalent, autoassociative network in the
model. But it is harder to predict where the interoceptive
autoassociative network might be located as only very little is known
about the distribution of valence signals in the hippocampus. However,
on the basis of the results of Nakamura et al. (2013) about the presence
of a proximal CA3- distal CA1 network involved primarily in processing
nonspatial information, it is more likely that interoceptive information
is encoded in CA3b,c and/or CA1 of the ventral hippocampus.

Generally, CA3 has been identiﬁed to be more involved than CA1 in the
rapid encoding of a wide range of novel associations aﬀorded by the
hippocampus (Nakashiba et al., 2008; Kesner, 2013). Selective blockade
of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors at CA3-CA3 synapses is
associated with impairments on single-trial learning tasks (Lee and
Kesner, 2002), including spatial tasks (Nakazawa et al., 2003),
paired-associate learning paradigms (Day et al., 2003), and fear
memories (Zhang et al., 2001; Quinn et al., 2005). Thus, it is likely
that CA3 NMDA

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

12

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

receptor-mediated plasticity mechanisms generally contribute to binding
distinct aspects of one-trial experiences including their interoceptive
features.

Together, these data support our hypothesis that speciﬁc subregions of
CA3 and CA1, but not the DG, may constitute speciﬁc processing nodes of
interoceptive information within the hippocampus. Under this view, we
have suggested that the hippocampus may recruit diﬀerent mechanisms by
which decorrelated representations can be established for exteroceptive
patterns and their associations to interoceptive patterns. This last
point is the focus of the next section.

4.3. Single-Trial Learning and Valence-Overload Interference In this
paper, we have argued for a distinction between two possible mechanisms
by which the hippocampus may reduce interference: (1) DG projections to
CA3, as widely believed, are necessary to enforce a new suﬃciently
separated representation cells, preventing (pattern-overload) onto CA3
pyramidal interference between the representations of exteroceptive
patterns stored autoassociatively in CA3, but (2) interference between
valences (valence-overload) is controlled by local circuit interactions
within CA3 (or probably CA1, cf. Section 4.2). The role of DG in pattern
separation has been extensively characterized in previous studies
(Leutgeb et al., 2007; Myers and Scharfman, 2009), which prompted us to
concentrate more on how to deal quickly with valence-overload
interference, especially under conditions involving one-time
experiences.

The most obvious way would be to strengthen correct associations between
exteroceptive patterns and their emotional valences and weaken incorrect
associations. However, this runs the risk of destroying previously
acquired associations because of the distributed, albeit fairly sparse,
nature of the representations of exteroceptive patterns. The model
proposed here provides an alternative mechanism that does not involve
forgetting, but exerts rather inhibitory eﬀects to resolve interference
from prior learned associations. In particular, the model assumes a
reciprocal interplay between groups of valence-associated cells,
mediated by excitatory and inhibitory connections such that only cells
in one group can ﬁre. When the prediction produced at retrieval does not
match the targeted valence, learning is directed to the next group of
valence cells that would later inhibit the erroneous response of the
former group during recall.

In support of this idea of functionally prewired groups of valence cells
are lineage studies demonstrating that clonally related pyramidal cells
are organized into discrete clusters in the stratum pyramidale of the
hippocampus (Grove and Tole, 1999). More insights have recently been
gained into the developmental prewiring of hippocampal circuits (Xu et
al., 2014). In particular, as it is the case in our model, it has been
found that sister cells do not preferentially form direct contacts with
each other, but share common inhibitory inputs from nearby fast-spiking
interneurons. Selective connectivity like this suggests that precise
inhibitory microcircuits may account for speciﬁc activity-dependent
processes in the hippocampus.

By the same token, the diversity of excitatory and inhibitory cells in
CA hippocampal regions (Bilkey and Schwartzkroin,

the detection of

1990; Scharfman, 1993) may provide a potential substrate for
interference and the processing of emotional information in the
hippocampus. In CA3c, pyramidal cells display some morphological and
electrophysiological characteristics diﬀerent from pyramidal cells in
other subregions of CA3. Importantly, it has been found that these cells
are not as susceptible to be activated as other CA3 pyramidal cells by
stimulation of dentate mossy ﬁbers in hippocampal slices (Scharfman,
1993). Diﬀerences in ﬁring patterns exhibited by diﬀerent classes of
pyramidal cells have been observed experimentally in CA3b (Hemond et
al., 2008). It is conceivable, therefore, that special mechanisms may be
in place to control CA3 neural responsiveness to external inputs under
speciﬁc physiological conditions.

role

One may

hypothesize

potential for a also interference and the neuromodulators in the
detection of processing of emotional information in the hippocampus. The
projection pattern of all major neuromodulator systems diﬀers along the
septotemporal axis of the hippocampus, with a higher density in the
ventral hippocampus (Strange et al., 2014). The magnocellular basal
forebrain cholinergic system sends eﬀerents that release ACh in all
hippocampal regions. As mentioned previously, and in line with our
model, ACh has been implicated in the regulation of oscillatory dynamics
in the hippocampus (Hasselmo et al., 1996; Hasselmo, 2006). Increased
release in ACh has been proposed to enhance the dynamics of memory
encoding by inhibiting synaptic transmission and facilitating long-term
potentiation (LTP) at speciﬁc connections, which may reduce interference
from previously encoded memories during the learning of incoming inputs.
Moreover, levels of hippocampal ACh release have been demonstrated to
control amygdala function in fear conditioning allowing for adaptive
selection of the best predictive stimulus (simple tone vs. context in
Calandreau et al., 2006). The inﬂuence of other neuromodulators, such as
dopamine and norepinephrine, is much less well understood but might be
modality-speciﬁc, allowing for diﬀerential encoding of nonspatial
information in the hippocampus (Ito and Schuman, 2012).

It is evident that a great deal remains to understand neural processing
of valence-related information in the hippocampus. Yet, as a step in
that direction, a testable prediction made by our model is that dentate
pattern separation may be needed to decorrelate highly similar
exteroceptive patterns but interference between valences may be detected
and treated in CA hippocampal regions relying on local inhibitory
microcircuits. However, valence-overload interference may not manifest
until the number of learned extero-interoceptive associations increases
considerably (cf. Section 3.1, Figure 4), due to high decorrelation
between hippocampal representations of exteroceptive patterns.

4.4. Role of Prediction-Error Signals in the Hippocampus In our model,
we assume the existence of two novelty signals, instead of only one, for
the ability to identify situations in which experiences are not novel
but the prediction of their associated valences is incorrect due to a
faulty learning or a change in the previously learned valences
(cf. Sections 3.3, 3.4, Figure 6). This

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

13

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

view is in accordance with electrophysiological recording studies
showing that hippocampal cells diﬀerentiate between correct and error
responses immediately after the behavioral response (Wirth et al.,
2009), and with signiﬁcantly stronger signals in CA1 (Lee et al., 2012).
However, the inﬂuence of prediction errors on hippocampal network
dynamics, as suggested in our model, has not been examined in the
literature. Thus, the relationship between prediction errors and ACh
level changes in the hippocampus needs to be further tested empirically
in the future. This may also enhance our understanding of the
interactions between the hippocampus and other MTL structures,
especially the amygdala, as many studies (McIntyre et al., 2002;
Calandreau et al., 2006) suggest alterations in hippocampal ACh release
as a potential determinant of the relative contributions of MTL
structures in learning and memory.

In conclusion, the model proposed in this paper provides an integrated
view of how the hippocampus may integrate exteroceptive and
interoceptive information and raises the

possibility that local inhibitory microcircuits may be recruited to deal
with valence-overload interference under the constraint of single-trial
learning of episodic memories. Extending our model to include a dentate
gyrus network mediating rapid separation of the neural representations
of exteroceptive patterns will allow for more complex tasks to be
simulated by the model. A further question that remains for future work
is to explore how the model will actually operate, synergistically
and/or competitively, with other models supporting incremental learning
of extero-interoceptive associations. Such a study, we believe, would
help explain many puzzling observations relative to
hippocampal-dependent behaviors. These include, for example, animal data
showing that single- but not multiple- trial contextual fear
conditioning is impaired by hippocampal lesions (Wiltgen et al., 2006),
while damage to the hippocampus after conditioning causes retrograde
amnesia for contextual fear memories regardless of training conditions
(Sutherland et al., 2008; Broadbent and Clark, 2013).

References

Andersen, P., Morris, R., Amaral, D., Bliss, T., and O’Keefe, J. (2007).
The

Hippocampus Book. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Apergis-Schoute, J., Pinto, A., and Paré, D. (2007). Muscarinic control
of long- range gabaergic inhibition within the rhinal cortices. J.
Neurosci. 27, 4061–4071. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0068-07.2007

Bast, T., Wilson,

I. A., Witter, M. P., and Morris, R. G. M.

(2009). From rapid place learning to behavioral performance: A key role
for the intermediate hippocampus. PLoS Biol. 7:e1000089. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.10 00089

Bennett, M. R., Gibson, W. G., and Robinson,

(1994). Dynamics of ca3 pyramidal neuron autoassociative memory network
in the the hippocampus. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 343,
167–187. doi: 10.1098/rstb.1994.0019

J.  

Bilkey, D. K., and Schwartzkroin, P. A. (1990). Variation in
electrophysiology and morphology of hippocampal ca3 pyramidal cells.
Brain Res. 514, 77–83. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(90)90437-G

Broadbent, N. J., and Clark, R. E. (2013). Remote context fear
conditioning remains hippocampus-dependent irrespective of training
protocol, trainingsurgery interval, lesion size, and lesion method.
Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 106, 300–308. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.08.008

Bush, D., Philippides, A., Husbands, P., and O’Shea, M. (2010).
Reconciling the stdp and bcm models of synaptic plasticity in a spiking
recurrent neural network. Neural Comput. 22, 2059–2085. doi:
10.1162/NECO/a/00003- Bush

Calandreau, L., Triﬁlieﬀ, P., Mons, N., Costes, L., Marien, M.,
Marighetto, A., et al. (2006). Extracellular hippocampal acetylcholine
level controls amygdala function and promotes adaptive conditioned
emotional response. J. Neurosci. 26, 13556–13566. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3713-06.2006

Canto, C. B., Wouterlood, F. G., and Witter, M. P. (2008). What does the
the entorhinal cortex tell us? Neural Plast.

anatomical organization of 2008:381243. doi: 10.1155/2008/381243

Cenquizca, L. A., and Swanson, L. W. (2007). Spatial organization of
direct hippocampal ﬁeld ca1 axonal projections to the rest of the
cerebral cortex. Brain Res. Rev. 56, 1–26. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.05.002

Cohen, N. J., and Eichenbaum, H. (1993). Memory, Amnesia, and the
Hippocampal

System. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Craig, A. (2009). How do you feel – now? the anterior insula and human
awareness.

Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 59–70. doi: 10.1038/nrn2555

Day, M., Langston, R., and Morris, R. G. M. (2003).
Glutamate-receptor-mediated encoding and retrieval of paired-associate
learning. Nature 424, 205–209. doi: 10.1038/nature01769

de Almeida, L., Idiart, M., and Lisman, J. E. (2007). Memory retrieval
time and memory capacity of the CA3 network: role of gamma frequency
oscillations. Learn Mem. 14, 795–806. doi: 10.1101/lm.730207

de Curtis, M., and Paré, D. (2004). The rhinal cortices: a wall of
inhibition between the neocortex and the hippocampus. Prog. Neurobiol.
74, 101–110. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2004.08.005

Dubreuil, A. M., Amit, Y., and Brunel, N. (2014). Memory capacity of
networks with stochastic binary synapses. PLoS Comput. Biol.
10:e1003727. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003727

Eichenbaum, H., Sauvage, M., Fortin, N., Komorowski, R., and Lipton,
(2012). Towards a functional organization of episodic memory in lobe.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 1597–1608. doi:

P.  the medial temporal 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.07.006

Fanselow, M. S., and Dong, H. W. (2010). Are the dorsal and ventral
structures? Neuron 65, 7–19. doi:

functionally distinct

hippocampus 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.11.031

Gluck, M. A., Meeter, M., and Myers, C. E. (2003). Computational models
of the hippocampal region: linking incremental learning and episodic
memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 269–276. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00105-0

Gluck, M. A., and Myers, C. E. (1993). Hippocampal mediation of stimulus
theory. Hippocampus 3, 491–516. doi:

representation: A computational 10.1002/hipo.450030410

Graham, B., and Willshaw, D. (1997). Capacity and information eﬃciency
of the associative net. Netw. Comput. Neural Syst. 8, 35–54. doi:
10.1088/0954- 898X/8/1/005

Grove, E. A., and Tole, S.

(1999). Patterning events and speciﬁcation signals in the developing
hippocampus. Cereb. Cortex 9, 551–561. doi: 10.1093/cercor/9.6.551

Hasselmo, M. E. (2006). The role of acetylcholine in learning and
memory. Curr.

Opin. Neurobiol. 16, 710–715. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2006.09.002

Hasselmo, M. E., Wyble, B. P., and Wallenstein, G. V. (1996). Encoding
and retrieval of episodic memories: role of cholinergic and gabaergic
modulation in the hippocampus. Hippocampus 6, 693–708. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1098- 1063(1996)6:6<693::AID-HIPO12>3.0.CO;2-W

Hemond, P., Epstein, D., Boley, A., Migliore, M., Ascoli, G. A., and
Jaﬀe, D. B. (2008). Distinct classes of pyramidal cells exhibit mutually
exclusive ﬁring patterns in hippocampal area ca3b. Hippocampus 18,
411–424. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20404

Henke, P. G. (1990). Hippocampal pathway to the amygdala and stress
ulcer development. Brain Res. Bull. 25, 691–695. doi:
10.1016/0361-9230(90)90044-Z Hobin, J. A., Ji, J., and Maren, S. (2006).
Ventral hippocampal muscimol disrupts context-speciﬁc fear memory
retrieval after extinction in rats. Hippocampus 16, 174–182. doi:
10.1002/hipo.20144

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

14

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

Hunsaker, M. R., Rosenberg, J. S., and Kesner, R. P. (2008). The role of
the dentate gyrus, CA3a,b, and CA3c for detecting spatial and
environmental novelty. Hippocampus 18, 1064–1073. doi:
10.1002/hipo.20464

Moser, M. B., Moser, E. I., Forrest, E., Andersen, P., and Morris, R. G.
(1995). Spatial learning with a minislab in the dorsal hippocampus.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 9697–9701. doi:
10.1073/pnas.92.21.9697

Ito, H. T., and Schuman, E. M. (2012). Functional division of
hippocampal area ca1 via modulatory gating of entorhinal cortical
inputs. Hippocampus 22, 372–387. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20909

Kennedy, P. J., and Shapiro, M. L. (2009). Motivational states activate
distinct hippocampal representations to guide goal-directed behaviors.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 10805–10810. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0903259106

Kesner, R. P. (2013). A process analysis of the ca3 subregion of the
hippocampus.

Front. Cell. Neurosci. 7:78. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00078

Kjelstrup, K. G., Tuvnes, F. A., Steﬀenach, H.-A., Murison, R., Moser,
E. I., and Moser, M.-B. (2002). Reduced fear expression after lesions of
the ventral hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 10825–10830.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.152112399

Knoblauch, A., Palm, G., and Sommer, F. T. (2010). Memory capacities for
synaptic and structural plasticity. Neural Comput. 22, 289–341. doi:
10.1162/neco.2009.08-07-588

LeDoux,

J. E.

(2007). The amygdala. Curr. Biol. 17, R868–R874. doi:

10.1016/j.cub.2007.08.005

Lee, H., Ghim, J. W., Kim, H., Lee, D., and Jung, M. (2012). Hippocampal
neural correlates for values of experienced events. J. Neurosci. 32,
15053–15065. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2806-12.2012

Lee, I., Griﬃn, A. L., Zilli, E. A., Eichenbaum, H., and Hasselmo, M. E.
(2006). Gradual translocation of spatial correlates of neuronal ﬁring in
the hippocampus toward prospective reward locations. Neuron 51, 639–650.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.06.033

Lee, I., and Kesner, R. P. (2002). Diﬀerential contribution of nmda
receptors in hippocampal subregions to spatial working memory. Nat.
Neurosci. 5, 162–168. doi: 10.1038/nn790

Leutgeb, J. K., Leutgeb, S., Moser, M.-B., and Moser, E. I. (2007).
Pattern separation in the dentate gyrus and ca3 of the hippocampus.
Science 315, 961–966. doi: 10.1126/science.1135801

learning, but not cue reversal

Levy-Gigi, E., Kelemen, O., Gluck, M. A., and Kéri, S. (2011). Impaired
context reversal learning, in patients with amnestic mild cognitive
impairment. Neuropsychologia 49, 3320–3326. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.08.005 and Redish, A.

and the hippocampus. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 364,
1193–1201. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0316

(2009). Prediction,

sequences

Lisman,

J.,

Lisman, J. E., and Otmakhova, N. A. (2001). Storage, recall, and novelty
detection of sequences by the hippocampus: elaborating on the socratic
model to account for normal and aberrant eﬀects of dopamine. Hippocampus
11, 551–568. doi: 10.1002/hipo.1071

Maren, S. (2014). Fear of the unexpected: hippocampus mediates
novelty-induced return of extinguished fear in rats. Neurobiol. Learn.
Mem. 108, 88–95. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.06.004

Marr, D. (1971). Simple memory: a theory for archicortex. Philos. Trans.
R. Soc.

Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 262, 23–81. doi: 10.1098/rstb.1971.0078

Mather, M. (2009). When emotion intensiﬁes memory interference. Psychol.
Learn.

Motiv. 51, 101–120.

McIntyre, C., Pal, S. N., Marriott, L. K., and Gold, P. E. (2002).
Competition between memory systems: acetylcholine release in the
hippocampus correlates negatively with good performance on an
amygdala-dependent task. J. Neurosci. 22, 1171–1176.

Meeter, M., Murre, J. M., and Talamini, L. M. (2004). Mode shifting
between storage and recall based on novelty detection in oscillating
hippocampal circuits. Hippocampus 14, 722–741. doi: 10.1002/hipo.10214

Meeter, M., Myers, C. E., and Gluck, M. A. (2005). Integrating
incremental learning and episodic memory models of the hippocampal
region. Psychol. Rev. 112, 560–585. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.112.3.560

Miyata, R., Ota, K., and Aonishi, T. (2013). Optimal design for hetero-
associative memory: hippocampal ca1 phase response curve and spike-
timing-dependent plasticity. PLoS ONE 8:e77395. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.00 77395

Moser, M. B., and Moser, E.

(1998). Functional diﬀerentiation in the hippocampus. Hippocampus 8,
608–619. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-
1063(1998)8:6<608::AID-HIPO3>3.0.CO;2-7

I.  

Moustafa, A. A., Myers, C. E., and Gluck, M. A. (2009). A
neurocomputational model of classical conditioning phenomena: a putative
role for the hippocampal region in associative learning. Brain Res.
1276, 180–195. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.04.020

Myers, C. E., and Scharfman, H. E. (2009). A role for hilar cells in
pattern separation in the dentate gyrus: a computational approach.
Hippocampus 19, 321–337. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20516

Nakamura, N. H., Flasbeck, V., Maingret, N., Kitsukawa, T., and Sauvage,
M. M. (2013). Proximodistal segregation of nonspatial information in
ca3: preferential recruitment of a proximal ca3-distal ca1 network in
nonspatial recognition memory. J. Neurosci. 33, 11506–11514. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4480-12.2013 Nakashiba, T., Young, J. Z., McHugh, T.
J., Buhl, D. L., and Tonegawa, S. (2008). Transgenic inhibition of
synaptic transmission reveals role of ca3 output in hippocampal
learning. Science 319, 1260–1264. doi: 10.1126/science.1151120 Nakazawa,
K., Sun, L. D., Quirk, M. C., Rondi-Reig, L., Wilson, M. A., and
Tonegawa, S. (2003). Hippocampal CA3 NMDA receptors are crucial for
memory acquisition of one-time experience. Neuron 38, 305–315. doi:
10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00165-X

Nolan, C. R., Wyeth, G., Milford, M., and Wiles, J. (2011). The race to
learn: Spike timing and stdp can coordinate learning and recall in ca3.
Hippocampus 21, 647–660. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20777

O’Reilly, R. C., and Rudy, J. W. (2001). Conjunctive representations in
learning and memory: principles of cortical and hippocampal function.
Psychol. Rev. 108, 311–345. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.108.2.311

Palm, G. (2013). Neural associative memories and sparse coding. Neural
Netw. 37,

165–171. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2012.08.013

Paz, R., and Paré, D. (2013). Physiological basis for emotional
modulation of memory circuits by the amygdala. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
23, 381–386. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2013.01.008

Paz, R., Pelletier, J. G. G., Bauer, E. P., and Paré, D. (2006).
Emotional enhancement interactions. Nat.

of memory via amygdala-driven facilitation of rhinal Neurosci. 9,
1321–1329. doi: 10.1038/nn1771

Pitkänen, A., Pikkarainen, M., Nurminen, N., and Ylinen, A. (2000).
Reciprocal connections between the amygdala and the hippocampal
formation, perirhinal cortex, and postrhinal cortex in rat: a review.
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 911, 369–391. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06738.x

Quinn, J. J., Loya, F., Ma, Q. D., and Fanselow, M. S. (2005). Dorsal
hippocampus nmda receptors diﬀerentially mediate trace and contextual
fear conditioning. Hippocampus 15, 665–674. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20088

Rolls, E. (2013). The mechanisms for pattern completion and pattern
separation in the hippocampus. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 7:74. doi:
10.3389/fnsys.2013.00074 Rolls, E. T. (2010). A computational theory of
episodic memory formation in the hippocampus. Behav. Brain Res. 215,
180–196. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.03.027 Rolls, E. T., and Xiang, J. Z.
(2005). Reward-spatial view representations and learning in the primate
hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 25, 6167–6174. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1481-05.2005

Samura, T., Hattori, M., and Ishizaki, S. (2008). Sequence
disambiguation and pattern completion by cooperation between
autoassociative and heteroassociative memories of functionally divided
hippocampal CA3. Neurocomputing 71, 3176–3183. doi:
10.1016/j.neucom.2008.04.026

Scharfman, H. E. (1993). Spiny neurons of area CA3c in rat hippocampal
slices have similar electrophysiological characteristics and synaptic
responses despite morphological variation. Hippocampus 3, 9–28. doi:
10.1002/hipo.450030103 Schmajuk, N. A., and DiCarlo, J. J. (1992).
Stimulus conﬁguration, classical conditioning, and hippocampal function.
Psychol. Rev. 99, 268–305. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.99.2.268

Shohamy, D., Myers, C. E., Hopkins, R. O., Sage, J., and Gluck, M. A.
(2009). Distinct hippocampal and basal ganglia contributions to
probabilistic learning and reversal. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 21, 1821–1833.
doi: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21138

Smith, D. M., and Mizumori, S.

context-speciﬁc neuronal

J. (2006). Learning-related development of the responses hippocampal
role in context processing. J. Neurosci. 26, 3154–3163. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3234-05.2006

and events:

to places

Steinbuch, K.

(1961). Die

lernmatrix. Kybernetik

1,

36–45.

doi:

10.1007/BF00293853

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

15

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

Strange, B. A., Witter, M. P., Lein, E. S., and Moser, E. I. (2014).
Functional organization of the hippocampal longitudinal axis. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 15, 655–669. doi: 10.1038/nrn3785

Sugase-Miyamoto, Y., and Richmond, B. J. (2007). Cue and reward signals
carried by monkey entorhinal cortex neurons during reward schedules.
Exp. Brain Res. 181, 267–276. doi: 10.1007/s00221-007-0926-z

Sutherland, R. J., O’Brien, J., and Lehmann, H. (2008). Absence of
systems consolidation of fear memories after dorsal, ventral, or
complete hippocampal damage. Hippocampus 18, 710–718. doi:
10.1002/hipo.20431

Tamamaki, N., and Nojyo, Y. (1995). Preservation of

topography in the connections between the subiculum, ﬁeld ca1, and the
entorhinal cortex in rats. J. Comp. Neurol. 353, 379–390. doi:
10.1002/cne.903530306

Thompson, C. L., Pathak, S. D., Jeromin, A., Ng, L. L., MacPherson, C.
R., Mortrud, M. T., et al. (2008). Genomic anatomy of the hippocampus.
Neuron 60, 1010–1021. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.12.008

Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and Semantic Memory, Organization of
Memory.

New York, NY: Academic Press.

van Groen, T., and Wyss,

J. M. (1990). Extrinsic projections from area ca1 of the rat
hippocampus: olfactory, cortical, subcortical, and bilateral hippocampal
formation projections. J. Comp. Neurol. 302, 515–528. doi:
10.1002/cne.903020308

Willshaw, D. J., Buneman, O. P., and Longuet-Higgins, H. C. (1969). Non-
holographic associative memory. Nature 222, 960–962. doi:
10.1038/222960a0 Wiltgen, B. J., Sanders, M. J., Anagnostaras, S. G.,
Sage, J. R., and Fanselow, M. S. (2006). Context fear learning in the
absence of the hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 26, 5484–5491. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2685-05.2006

Wirth, S., Avsar, E., Chiu, C. C., Sharma, V., Smith, A. C., Brown, E.
N., et al. in the (2009). Trial outcome and associative learning signals
monkey hippocampus. Neuron 61, 930–940. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.
01.012

Witter, M. P. (2007). Intrinsic and extrinsic wiring of CA3: indications
for connectional heterogeneity. Learn. Mem. 14, 705–713. doi:
10.1101/lm. 725207

Xu, H.-T., Han, Z., Gao, P., He, S., Li, Z., Shi, W., et al. (2014).
Distinct lineage- dependent structural and functional organization of
the hippocampus. Cell 157, 1552–1564. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.067

Zhang, W. N., Bast, T., and Feldon, J. (2001). The ventral hippocampus
and fear conditioning in rats: diﬀerent anterograde amnesias of fear
after infusion of n-methyl-d-aspartate or its noncompetitive antagonist
mk-801 into the ventral hippocampus. Behav. Brain Res. 126, 159–174.
doi: 10.1016/S0166- 4328(01)00256-X

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2015 Kassab and Alexandre. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution and reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and
that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

16

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87


