Tracking ecology is 
not old-fashioned

Long-term monitoring is not 
innovative and is never going 
to result in spin-off businesses, 
but it is still the best way of 
observing human impact on the 
environment. The use of trained 
personnel to take outdoor 
measurements is being called 
into question, however.
The UK Countryside 

Survey, for example, relies on 
experienced botanists to go out 
in all weathers to find out how 
habitats and species are changing. 
Their ability to recognize a 
particular species of grass among 
other vegetation, for instance, 
cannot be replaced by technology. 
In my view, expert volunteers 
(citizen scientists) who are willing 
to monitor particular ecological 
environments or species are no 
substitute, because their botanical 
expertise does not usually focus 
on the commonplace and the 
widespread. 

Doing the same observations 

in the same way and at the 
same places no longer seems 
to light up potential funders. 
If they underrate the valuable 
expertise of fieldworkers and 
field botanists, we stand to 
lose one of the most highly 
regarded ecological monitoring 
programmes in Europe and 
the world.
Lisa Norton Centre for Ecology 
and Hydrology, Lancaster, UK.
lrn@ceh.ac.uk

Code review poses 
extra challenges

As editors-in-chief of ReScience, 
a journal dedicated to 
computational replication (see 
http://rescience.github.io), we 
argue that the review of software 
codes used in research papers 
requires a departure from the 
conventional refereeing process 
(see Nature 555, 142; 2018).
In addition to scientific 
expertise, reviewers need 
experience in software 
development and programming 
languages to be able to run 

the code and inspect it. They 
must test the source code and 
whether figures and/or tables 
from the submitted article 
can be reproduced using the 
software, input files, data sets 
and instructions supplied by the 
authors.

In our experience, technical 
problems that arise in installing 
and running scientific software 
are resolved most effectively if 
authors and reviewers can discuss 
the issues with one another. 
ReScience uses the GitHub 
platform for such open reviewing 
(see also N. P. Rougier et al. PeerJ 
Comp. Sci. 3, e142; 2017).
Nicolas P. Rougier Inria 
Bordeaux — South West Research 
Centre, Talence, France.
Konrad Hinsen Centre for 
Molecular Biophysics (CBM), 
CNRS, Orléans, France. 
konrad.hinsen@cnrs.fr

Quality-assured data 
for enzyme activity

Transparent reporting of 
experimental methods to ensure 
the reproducibility of results 
(see Nature 555, 6; 2018) is 
particularly crucial in enzyme 
kinetics, given the wide variation 
in many assay parameters. 
It also allows unambiguous 
interpretation of the data. 

The STRENDA (Standards 

for Reporting Enzymology 
Data) database is a repository 
for published enzymology data, 
lodged under its guidelines 
for transparent reporting 
of experimental methods 
(see go.nature.com/2qq9vm7). 
The STRENDA Commission is 
working with the biochemistry 
community and funding 
agencies to make submission to 
this database routine practice 
during publication. More than 
50 journals currently recommend 
the guidelines to their authors. 

The implementation of 
scientific data standards has 
typically been left to data curators 
(see, for example, U. Wittig et al. 
Nucl. Acids Res. 46, D656–D660; 
2018). The STRENDA database 
now serves as a formal validation 

tool for reliable reporting of 
data (see also N. Swainston et al. 
FEBS J. https://doi.org/cm8d; 
2018). 

We suggest that our model 
could be adapted for the benefit 
of authors, reviewers, data 
consumers, publishers and 
funders across experimental 
disciplines.
Neil Swainston, Carsten Kettner 
on behalf of the STRENDA 
Commission, Beilstein Institute 
for the Advancement of Chemical 
Sciences, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.
ckettner@beilstein-institut.de

A surge in Brazilian 
papers in top journals

As a rough assessment of Brazil’s 
contribution to high-impact 
science from 1980 onwards, we 
analysed the number of papers 
published in Nature and Science 
from three of the country’s 
leading universities. We found 
a dramatic increase in their 
publications in these prestigious 
journals over the period.

We combined publication 
counts for the University of São 
Paulo, the University of Campinas 
and the Federal University of Rio 
de Janeiro. To track the long-term 
trend in their performance, we 
sampled counts every decade 
from 1980 to 2010 and for 2017. 
During the 5 individual years 
we sampled from this span 
of 37 years, these institutions 
together published 0.08 papers, 
on average, in each edition of the 
two journals (details available 
from authors on request). 

Although this is low compared 

with averages amounting to 
about 1.5, 0.6 and 0.5 papers 
per edition from Harvard 
University in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, and the UK 
universities of Cambridge and 
Oxford, respectively, the total 
number of papers from the 
Brazilian universities increased 
by 2,200% from 1980 (1 article) 
to 2017 (23 articles). The rise has 
been steepest during the current 
decade (from just 7 papers in 
2010), despite Brazil’s economic 

crisis that started in 2014. 
This overall increase, in 
our view, reflects the intense 
research activity and resilience 
of the Brazilian institutions, 
which all have a strong history of 
international collaboration. Now 
more than ever, governmental 
commitment to science is 
crucial for our future research 
performance.
Gabriel José de Carli, Tiago 
Campos Pereira University of 
São Paulo, Brazil.
tiagocampospereira@ffclrp.usp.br

Set goals for cancer 
research funding

Cancer Research UK — one of 
the country’s largest voluntary-
sector funding organizations 
— is seeking to improve the 
survival rates of people with 
cancer from around 50% today 
to 75% in 2034. We propose 
ways to focus cancer-research 
funding more effectively to help 
attain this goal.

We suggest that priority 
funding should go towards 
improving detection of early-
stage, treatable tumours; 
developing innovative therapies 
for cancers that have high 
mortality rates even when 
they are detected early; and 
accelerating the translation of 
promising new drugs — which 
currently takes 17 years on 
average (Z. S. Morris et al. J. R. 
Soc. Med. 104, 510–520; 2011).
Strong leadership is crucial 

for implementing this three-
pronged approach, and for 
optimal oversight of research 
funding. From our experience, 
training of team leaders 
needs to concentrate more 
on developing the skills for 
managing research teams and 
on acquiring the techniques for 
efficiently directing processes. 
Such training could be delivered 
by a leadership academy run by 
respected research leaders and 
business coaches.
Johnathan Watkins, Wahyu 
Wulaningsih PILAR Research 
Network, Cambridge, UK.
jwatkins@pilar.org.uk

©

2018

Macmillan

Publishers

Limited,

part

of

Springer

Nature.

All

rights

1 9 A P R I L 2 0 1 8 | V O L 5 5 6 | N A T U R E | 3 0 9
reserved.

Correspondence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
