Replication of Laje & Mindlin’s model producing synthetic syllables
Jean-Baptiste Zacchello, Xavier Hinaut, Arthur Leblois

To cite this version:

Jean-Baptiste Zacchello, Xavier Hinaut, Arthur Leblois. Replication of
Laje & Mindlin’s model pro- ￿hal- ducing synthetic syllables. European
Birdsong Meeting, Apr 2018, Odense, Denmark. 2018. 01964522￿

HAL Id: hal-01964522

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01964522

Submitted on 22 Dec 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Replication of Laje & Mindlin’s model producing synthetic syllables

J.B. Zacchello1,2,3, X. Hinaut1,2,3, A. Leblois3 1. Inria Bordeaux
Sud-Ouest, Talence, France. 2. LaBRI, UMR 5800, CNRS, Bordeaux INP,
Université de Bordeaux, Talence, France. 3. Institut des Maladies
Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, CNRS, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux,
France.

Abstract In order to implement a realistic output in a song learning
model, we investigated one of the models proposed in the long research
quest of Minldin. We were looking for a model with few degrees of
freedom, and replicated the RA model proposed in Laje & Mindlin (2002).
The model describes three neural populations of RA receiving inputs from
HVC: two of which are excitatory and control the syringeal muscles and
respiratory muscles (xk and xp resp.); one which stands for inhibitory
interneurons. This model is able to produce syllables sounds. We
implemented this model in Python language and tried to reproduced
several figures of the original paper: a bifurcation diagram and three
synthetic syllables.

Materials & Methods

Mean-field population model The interaction between these populations
are described by three ordinary differential equations (ODE).

where S denotes a sigmoid function S(x) = 1/(1+e-x) and 𝜌i are the
excitatory inputs from HVC into the sets of neurons with activities xp
(pression), y (inhibitory), and xk (tension) respectively.

The neural sets within RA: two excitatory sets (shaded circles)
connected to a long-range inhibitory one (open square). All sets receive
excitatory inputs from HVC, denoted here by dashed lines. Inset:
averaged activity of one of the populations (bottom), and spiking
activity consistent with the averaged activity (top).

Discussion We could partly reproduce the results (i.e. figures) of the
original paper of Laje & Mindlin (2002). According to our experiments it
seems that the original bifurcation diagram was probably interpolated by
hand because we obtain a qualitatively similar figure but not a
quantitatively similar figure. We could also produce a few different
synthetic syllables with the model. However, we were not able to
reproduce the same “song” composed of the three syllables as it is shown
in the original figure. Moreover, we were not able to find the initial
conditions which enable to produce a syllable “right away” when setting
a particular 𝜌2 value: a transitory period was necessary before the
corresponding syllable (of their paper) could be produced. In
conclusion, the model can produce a few isolated syllables but, and, as
far as we experimented, it seems difficult to produce songs.

Original figures

Bifurcation diagram

Reproduced figures Synthetic syllables We show the three syllables
obtained when changing sequentially the values of 𝜌2 (-11.0; -11.8;
-7.1), while keeping 𝜌1 = 0 and 𝜌3 = 6. Moreover, we give the
corresponding pressure and tension activity. We used a sampling

rate of 105,000 when generating the sounds.

Bifurcation diagram obtained as 𝜌2 is varied. 𝜌1 = 0, 𝜌3 = 6. FP
fixed-point, P1: period-one limit cycle, P2 period-two limit cycle. The
P1 oscillation is represented by two points indicating maximum and
minimum of the oscillation, and the P2 oscillation is represented by
four points indicating two local maxima and two local minima. Solid
line: stable solutions; dashed line: unstable solutions.

Synthetic syllables

(a) A recorded song of a white-crowned sparrow (Zonotrichia leucophrys),
    and (b) the synthetic song. One of the syllables cannot be generated
    by this subpopulation. Values of 𝜌2 used for the different
    syllables: syll. “a”: 𝜌2 = -11.0; syll. “b”: 𝜌2 = -11.8; syll. “c”:
    𝜌2 = -7.1;

Reproduced figures

Bifurcation diagram

Bifurcation diagram obtained by two pass iterative simulations. (blue)
local minima (red) local maxima. Scale is piece-wise linear in order to
keep a similar shape than in the original figure. We used a sampling
rate of 63,000 when generating the sounds.

Acknowledgements We thank Juliette Chabassier for useful discussions and
advises.

References Laje, R., & Mindlin, G. B. (2002). Diversity within a
birdsong. Physical review letters, 89(28), 288102.


