How to Understand Brain-Body-Environment Interactions? Toward a systemic
Representationalism Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre. How to Understand Brain-Body-Environment
Interactions? Toward a systemic Representationalism. Constructivist
foundations, 2017, 13 (1), pp.130-131. ￿hal-01651768￿

HAL Id: hal-01651768

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01651768

Submitted on 29 Nov 2017

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

n o I T C A n E n I

s T P E C n o C l A C I g o l o I B

130

How to Understand Brain-Body-Environment Interactions? Toward a systemic
Representationalism

Frédéric Alexandre Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, France
frederic.alexandre/at/inria.fr

  Upshot • The target article discusses the influence of the enactivist
  account of perception in computer science, be- yond subjectivism and
  objectivism. I suggest going one step further and in- troduce our
  VirtualEnaction platform, proposing a federative systemic view for
  brain-body-environment interaction for this analysis.

Introduction « 1 » Thanks to recent advances in phi- losophy and
computer science, the authors of the target article propose a new
analysis of the problems of misrepresentation and comparability of
visual experience that were judged essential by Francisco Varela (Vare-
la, Thompson & Rosch 1991). In this com- mentary, I would like to go one
step further and evoke other advances that allow us not only to revisit
these problems but also to as- sociate them more closely.

« 2 » In §1 and §25 of their target ar- ticle, Adrián Palacios,
María-José Escobar and Esteban Céspedes clearly explain that, in an
enactivist framework, perception is due to the co-determination between
in- ner mechanisms of the neurophysiological structure (subjectivism of
neuronal feed- back or lateral interactions, §23) and eco- logical
interaction in the environment (ob- jectivism of a spectral reflectance
for color perception, §22). We have recently built a global software
simulator called VirtualEn- action (denoyelle et al. 2014; 2015) that
implements not only models of cerebral regions but also models of the
body of an agent and of the environment in which it acts. With this
platform, which also takes care of the simulation of interactions be-
tween these models, we are consequently able to observe in a unique and
unified framework how perception is a property of

ConSTRuCTIVIST FoundATIons vol. 13, n°1

the world enacted by the animal-environ- ment co-determination, as
proposed in §25 for color perception.

« 3 » Even if problems of misrepresen- tation and comparability emerge
from con- cepts of representation, it is explained in §5 that a weak
contextualist notion of represen- tation is needed to analyze these
problems and is still compatible with enactivism. A major interest of
the target article is to argue, based on philosophical analysis, that a
“non- representationalist notion of representation” (§35) is necessary
in our informational world and does not compromise the central view of
enactivism, rejecting the representa- tion of both purely objective and
subjective properties. Instead, it can be supposed that, in the process
of co-determination, some kind of representation (in the weak sense) is
constituted, in idealized dimensional spaces. The representation of
color perception in the weak sense, described in §31 as the state of the
agent, of the environment, of senso- rimotor activity and evolutionary
history, is the kind of distributed representation that is built in
VirtualEnaction. This computation- al platform is consequently the ideal
tool to revisit most concepts of the target article and raise new
questions.

VirtualEnaction « 4 » Researchers designing systemic models of the brain
with the aim of imple- functions large-scale executive menting have to
consider the brain as a system in interaction with the body and the
environ- ment, and design robotic setups to emulate the emerging
behavior. My team, together with neuroscientists, studies certain high-
level behaviors, i.e., survival strategies in a world with punishing and
rewarding stimuli and agents, related to respondent and oper- ant
conditioning. The tasks are organized in long-lasting protocols, so that
we can study the evolution of learning, elaborate some statistics, and
make comparisons with bio- logical observations. It proved difficult for
us to use physical robots for long periods, and we also found it
necessary to measure, quantify and control details of the brain model as
well as of the environment, includ- ing the body. This was our initial
motivation for designing the VirtualEnaction platform. is an adapta-
tion of the Minecraft open game platform,

« 5 » VirtualEnaction

where the usual human player is replaced by a software application
corresponding to the model of the brain. The platform allows one to
define the structure of the world and its intrinsic rules (e.g., moving
agents, gravity, surface reflectance), the characteristics of the body
(e.g., sensors for vision as well as for pain, actuators), and, of
course, a module corresponding to the cerebral architecture defined for
the considered task. Since every component is defined as a programmable
software application, it is consequently pos- sible to define precisely
(and complexify at will) the kind of survival task, the character-
istics of the body, and the level of details in the neuronal module.

« 6 » This software platform has been designed and already used to
analyze, with neuroscientist colleagues, some classical protocols of
learning like Pavlovian learn- ing (Carrere & Alexandre 2015) or
decision making (Carrere & Alexandre 2016). Here, I propose to analyze a
prospective experiment in which we adapt this platform to build a
subjective representation (as in active com- puter vision, §16) in the
brain module and specifically consider introducing, in the visual
processing regions, some neuronal mechanisms known to induce contour il-
lusions (Grossberg & Raizada 2000), other mechanisms proposed to induce
illusions of color constancy (§10), top-down processes transmitting
expectancies in the lower levels of processing (Grossberg & Versace
2008).

Analysis of the experiment « 7 » Firstly, the above-mentioned neu- ronal
mechanisms have already been proven to generate some kinds of illusion
but they are not able to detect them locally because illusions are only
emerging from local neu- ronal mechanisms. Secondly, it is also clear
that other parts of the software platform will represent the environment
and accordingly the veridical perception. Rephrasing §36, we could
consequently propose that our platform is a support for a good theory of
perception.

« 8 » The target article has little prob- lem in defining veridical
perception (§38), and finds it more difficult to define illusions (§40).
our approach gives an easier access to illusions. Particularly, we could
say that internal mechanisms in the brain module will always modify the
sensory input and,

Enaction

How to Understand Brain-Body-Environment Interactions? Frédéric
Alexandre

accordingly, will always generate a kind of illusion. We could also add
that only some sensory inputs will generate very few modi- fications,
because their characteristics are well adapted to the current state and
internal mechanisms of the brain module and might give “the illusion of
no illusion.” Perhaps here we meet the idea of correct perceptual
experience “in correspondence with the rel- evant enactive conditions of
the perceiver and its environment” (§41).

« 9 » At the end, with this analysis in mind, is the problem of
misrepresentation so important? A certain situation might lead to a
representation in the environment module corresponding to veridical
percep- tion and a representation in the brain mod- ule corresponding to
an illusion. Whereas the former representation is simply due to the game
engine of Minecraft simulating the environment, the latter is the kind
of weak representation evoked above, built from sensory input and
internal neuro- nal dynamics, including local mechanisms prone to
illusions for certain input. That il- lusion might lead to an erroneous
decision, but we can also propose that the most im- portant point is to
be able to check that each module of the platform obeys its own local
rules and that the platform conveys two dif- ferent phenomena, the
veridical perception and its internal processing, and not a mis-
representation.

« 10 » As an answer to the problem of comparability, it can be stated
that no two organisms are strictly identical and neither do they share
identical perceptual experi- ences, with an identical series of
perceptual episodes received by two identical biologi- cal organisms
(§34 and §43). This platform might go beyond this statement and offer a
more quantitative analysis of the differences observed in the parameters
describing the brain module as a function of changes in parameters
describing perceptual episodes and the initial state of the brain
module. It might be reasonably supposed that this function is most of
the time continuous (in the mathematical sense) and, accordingly, that
two similar organisms experiencing similar episodes will have few
differences. In addition, we could also imagine that sin- gularities of
this function (still in the math- ematical sense) might occur in
situations where only one organism has an illusion.

« 11 » Concerning the structure sup- porting shared aspects of
perceptual expe- rience (§13), monitoring the activity of the brain
module during a set of experiences can lead to quantifying modifications
that have taken place in the module, correspond- ing to a kind of prior
of the agent. Even if it is unlikely that agents with different experi-
ences have a well-identified structure with shared aspects, one can
envisage quantifying the level of overlap between two histories of
modification, at a global level or concerning a specific domain, and
consequently evalu- ating an estimation of their degree of resem-
blance. on this view, comparability would be rather a matter of degree.

summary « 12 » our VirtualEnaction platform is a convenient tool for
manipulating enactivist concepts because it offers, on the same plat-
form, access to monitor characteristics of the brain-body-environment
system quanti- tatively in space and time. It addition, it ex- tends the
target article because it defines, in the brain module, a representation
built in the weak sense by co-construction between inner neuronal
mechanisms and ecological interactions in the environment, which can
ease the interpretation of the problems of misunderstanding and
comparability. The fact that this weak representation is consis- tent
with the concept of enacted reality can be defended more strongly here
because the brain module is developed in a systemic view, including not
only sensory but also motor regions that can modify the environ- ment,
giving a concrete anchoring to the principle of co-determination between
the agent and the environment.

« 13 » The role of action (“action shapes perception” §1) is central for
enactivism and has been often discussed when actions are oriented toward
the environment. In our systemic models of the brain, we introduce other
kinds of actions with no visible effect in the outer world but modifying
the inter- nal world, like covert attention (Fix, Rougier & Alexandre
2011) or decisions for chang- ing the current goal (Carrere & Alexandre
2016). our platform could be a convenient tool to study the effects of
such internal actions on perception. Enactivism has al- ready had a
focused but strong influence in modeling sciences and in robotics
(Buzsaki,

Peyrache & Kubie 2014; Friston 2010; Froese & Ziemke 2009); exploiting
and developing this platform in that direction is a new illus- tration
of that influence.

Questions to the authors « 14 » It is stated in §34 that enacted reality
can be observed in the system per- ceiver-environment and is objective.
Even if we build here only a model of this system, is objectivism still
present? (Q1)

« 15 » The framework that we present here considers the combined effect
of differ- ent agents (brain, body, environment), with representations
built in the brain module from interactions between sensory inputs and
inner neuronal mechanisms, not only for the sensory analysis of the
environment but also to act and modify it. Is the idea of weak
representationalism still valid here or is it pertinent to introduce
instead the idea of systemic representationalism? (Q2)

« 16 » Could linking our analysis of the problem of comparability (no
two organ- isms are strictly identical but sometimes the differences ‒
priors ‒ are weak and the or- ganisms can be judged similar and able to
share some experience) and of the problem of misrepresentation (a
functioning brain always modifies sensory inputs and, strictly speaking,
generates some illusion, but some- times these modifications are minor
and have no strong impact on the perceptual analysis and subsequent
behavior) explain some common-sense assumptions? (Q3)

Frédéric Alexandre is an Inria Director of Research, head of the
Mnemosyne team affiliated to Inria, CNRS, Université de Bordeaux,
Bordeaux INP, through UMR LaBRI and IMN. The team aims at developing
systemic models of the brain using formalism of computational
neuroscience and is specifically interested in understanding how
high-level cognitive functions emerge from the synergy between different
kinds of memory. This approach is very consistent with the enactivist
view of brain-body- environment interactions. The team is hosted in the
neuroscience laboratory on the Bordeaux hospital campus, favoring
medical and neurobiological applications, but investigations in machine
learning and artificial intelligence are also considered.

Received: 19 october 2017 Accepted: 27 october 2017

http://constructivist.info/13/1/117.palacios

131


