Affordances for AI-Enhanced Digital Game-Based
Learning
Margarida Romero, Petros Lameras, Sylvester Arnab

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Petros Lameras, Sylvester Arnab. Affordances for AI-Enhanced Digital Game-
Based Learning. Creative Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Springer Nature Switzer-
land, pp.117 - 128, 2024, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture, ￿10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_9￿.
￿hal-04593577￿

HAL Id: hal-04593577

https://hal.science/hal-04593577

Submitted on 29 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

9 

Affordances for AI-Enhanced Digital 
Game-Based Learning 

Margarida Romero, Petros Lameras, and Sylvester Arnab 

Abstract This chapter investigates the dynamic synergy between peda-
gogy, social dynamics, and technological developments in Digital Game-
Based Learning (DGBL), which is enhanced by artiﬁcial intelligence 
(AI). The chapter navigates through educational modiﬁcations, learner 
proﬁling challenges, social enhancements, and technical considerations, 
emphasising AI’s revolutionary inﬂuence. The topic expands on the 
critical interaction between learning analytics and machine learning, 
demonstrating AI’s promise for personalised and adaptable DGBL expe-
riences. The practical ramiﬁcations of real-time feedback in AI-driven 
instruction
DGBL are discussed, with the goal of providing timely 

M. Romero (B) 
Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France 
e-mail: margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr; margarida.romero@unice.fr 
P. Lameras · S. Arnab 
Coventry University, Coventry, UK 
e-mail: ab3430@coventry.ac.uk 

S. Arnab 
e-mail: aa8110@coventry.ac.uk 

© The Author(s) 2024 
A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in 
Education, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_9 

117

118

M. Romero et al.

and encouraging positive behaviours. Finally, the chapter sheds light on 
the collaborative evolution of AI-enhanced education, providing useful 
insights for educators, instructional designers, and developers in creating 
optimised digital learning environments. 

Keywords Learning analytics · Digital Game-Based Learning · 
Affordances · Feedback · Learner modelling 

Introduction 

Playful learning environments, particularly those utilising Digital Game-
Based Learning (DGBL), have reunited a diverse community of research 
in different 
which aims to design and evaluate the use of DGBL 
educational settings. With the advent of learning analytics and artiﬁcial 
intelligence (AI), these environments now offer enhanced pedagogical 
and social affordances. This chapter explores the intersection of these 
affordances, pedagogy, and AI within playful learning environments, 
delving into the technical, pedagogical, and social aspects that contribute 
to their effectiveness. 

Design Affordances for AI Tools in Education 

Game design is an essential activity in game studies which aims to 
provide the frameworks for ensuring the alignment between the game 
objectives, learning mechanics (Menon & Romero, 2020; Nadolny et al., 
2017; Proulx et al., 2017), game mechanics, and the playful experi-
ence of learning. In game design, affordances are not always explicitly 
deﬁned. We can consider three types of affordances including pedagog-
ical, social, and technical affordances. These three types of affordances are 
intricate and interdependent. Technical affordances provide the founda-
tion, offering support for the implementation of pedagogical and social 
design activities. However, the effectiveness of learning is signiﬁcantly 
inﬂuenced by the thoughtful integration of pedagogical and social affor-
dances. Effective game design can support the synergy between these

9 Affordances for AI-Enhanced Digital Game-Based …

119

three types of affordances, facilitating a dynamic and adaptive learning 
environment. 

Pedagogical Affordances in AI Tools 
for Education 

The integration of AI into DGBL introduces a transformative approach 
to education, offering dynamic and personalised learning experiences. 
AI’s adaptive capability allows for real-time modiﬁcations in response to 
the learner/player’s proﬁle, ensuring a customised and engaging journey 
through the DGBL. This adaptability operates at the speed of the 
learner’s progression, contributing to the enrichment and improvement 
of data accuracy for more effective, actionable, and adaptive feedback 
and ﬂow balancing (Gaurav et al., 2022). 

Affordances derive from the information structure of the environ-
ment and the sensory capabilities of the AI agent (virtual or physical), 
emerging through the interaction between the learner–player and the 
DGBL system integrating AI capabilities. In the context of game-based 
learning, AI-driven learning analytics can leverage these affordances to 
enhance the interactive and adaptive elements of the gaming environ-
ment. Pedagogical affordances in playful learning environments encom-
pass various pedagogical approaches and learning activities facilitated by 
information and communication technology (ICT) tools. 

Essentially, an affordance means the property of a system which allows 
certain actions to be performed, and which encourage speciﬁc types of 
behaviour that might determine how technology could possibly be used 
(Lameras et al., 2012; Kalmpourtzis & Romero, 2020). The concept 
of affordance may have a positive impact in terms of providing a richer 
understanding of the pedagogical design inherent to AI tools that would 
profoundly lead to an enhanced AI-based learning experience. The hall-
mark of AI in DGBL encompasses its adaptive capability, enabling real-
time modiﬁcations aligned with the learner’s proﬁle. This adaptability 
operates at the learner’s pace, contributing to enriched data accuracy and 
fostering more effective, actionable feedback. The affordance of person-
alisation (e.g. Lameras et al., 2021; Luckin & Cukurova, 2019) may

120

M. Romero et al.

discern customised and engaging learning journeys, tailoring content and 
challenges based on individual learner proﬁles. This affordance creates 
a dynamic and responsive in-game learning interaction by modifying 
content and challenges on-the-ﬂy. Furthermore, this adaptability ensures 
that the learning journey remains challenging yet attainable, catering to 
the individual needs and pace of each learner (e.g. Hou et al., 2021). 

Examples 

learning, project-based 

include problem-based 

learning, 
case-based learning, inquiry-based learning, and game-based learning. 
AI, when integrated into DGBL environments, enhances the adapt-
ability and customisation of these pedagogical approaches, providing 
personalised learning experiences tailored to individual student needs 
(Lampropoulos, 2023). 

The challenge of learner/player proﬁling is substantial, considering the 
multifaceted inﬂuences of intrinsic and extrinsic factors such as person-
ality, motivation, interest, mood, and external events (Nacke, 2018; 
Tondello & Nacke, 2020). Understanding player traits becomes crucial 
for tailoring personalisations that inﬂuence both gameplay and learning 
experiences, recognising the diverse composition of individuals. Future 
endeavours should focus on leveraging AI to comprehensively under-
stand players and learners through incremental and iterative proﬁling. 

DGBLs serve as invaluable sources of data for training AI, aiming to 
deepen the understanding of learners and enhance personalised expe-
riences. Current efforts predominantly centre on utilising video games 
to train AI algorithms, leveraging the structured progression inherent 
in game design. Google’s DeepMind AI exempliﬁes this approach, 
building predictive models based on extensive learning from thousands 
of ‘Go’ games (Silver et al., 2017) and achieving ‘Grandmaster’ status in 
‘Starcraft II’ (Vinyals et al., 2019). 

AI advancements in mastering real-time strategy present opportunities 
for intelligently staging and scaffolding the learning experience. Rather 
than focusing solely on creating AI players excelling at speciﬁc games, 
a similar approach can be applied to develop models that progressively 
support and offer actionable feedback to learners throughout the gameful 
learning process. This feedback is not only beneﬁcial to learners but also 
empowers teachers to provide personalised support, fostering continuous 
adaptation for improved retention and learning outcomes.

9 Affordances for AI-Enhanced Digital Game-Based …

121

like 

Personalised and adaptive support extends beyond player 

interac-
tions, as AI-driven, non-player characters (NPCs) play a pivotal role 
by contributing to a game’s depth and storyline. Games 
‘The 
Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim’ are at the forefront of developing NPCs 
that learn and evolve from interactions with players and other NPCs 
(Yannakakis &Togelius, 2018). This industry-driven development aligns 
with academic research interests, signalling a shift towards more mean-
ingful, responsive, and adaptive interactions between learners and in-
learning scenarios. The 
game characters 
prospect of intelligent NPCs enhances the realism of educational game 
environments, fostering a more immersive and personalised learning 
experience. 

in the context of gameful 

Social Affordances in AI for Education 

AI systems can intricately develop, analyse, and leverage player/learner 
proﬁles in an incremental and iterative manner, aiming to deliver inten-
tional experiences that consider various factors inﬂuencing motivation 
(Arnab, 2020). This evolving landscape in AI aligns with the exploration 
of social affordances, emphasising the potential for AI in education to 
foster tailored and socially connected learning experiences. 

Social affordances focus on creating a conducive social context within 
ICT tools for learners’ interactions. Safety, comfort, and convenience 
are crucial aspects. Ensuring students feel safe to express themselves 
involves considerations such as privacy settings and moderation. Estab-
lishing a comfortable environment requires clear ground rules, which can 
be supported by the presence of moderators or by a DGBL design in 
which the social interaction is modelled in order to be monitored and 
regulated by an adaptive system. Convenience is facilitated by supporting 
various communication modalities (text, audio, video) and synchronous/ 
asynchronous discussions. AI can contribute by analysing emotions (Li 
et al., 2023) and social interactions, ensuring a positive and inclusive 
online atmosphere.

122

M. Romero et al.

Technical Affordances in AI for Education 

Technical affordances pertain to the capacity and usability of ICT tools. 
The availability of different versions, each catering to speciﬁc needs, 
ensures ﬂexibility. Usability, 
interface design, ease of use, 
including 
and technical support, directly inﬂuences the effectiveness of the tool. 
While technical affordances are necessary, they alone do not guarantee 
successful learning outcomes. The interplay of pedagogical and social 
affordances is crucial, emphasising that effective design relies on the 
synergy between technology and instructional and social designs. 

Affordances Perception, Learning Analytics, 
and Machine Learning 

The recognition and utilisation of affordances in human interaction with 
playful learning environments constitute a pivotal aspect of adaptive 
digital game-based 
literature review of Bani-
hashem et al. (2023) shows the capacity of learning analytics to support 
dynamic and adaptive DGBL environments where learners can follow 
and adjust their learning based on their own speciﬁc needs. 

learning (DGBL). The 

As individuals engage with DGBL adaptive environments, they can 
beneﬁt from learning analytics when they engage with the designed 
affordances during their play activity. This interaction sets the stage for 
the generation of speciﬁc learning analytics, opening avenues for diverse 
analytical approaches, with machine learning emerging as a particularly 
promising avenue. 

In DGBL, machine learning based on learning analytics refers to 
the utilisation of machine learning algorithms to enhance the analyt-
ical process of assessing learning analytics to identify certain aspects of 
the learning process during DGBL interactions. The primary objective 
is to leverage these insightful learning analytics to inform the adaptive 
DGBL environment in support of learning processes. This application of 
machine learning holds the potential to provide additional opportunities 
to support the way learning analytics are analysed, offering educators and 
administrators a data-driven approach for adaptive DGBL.

9 Affordances for AI-Enhanced Digital Game-Based …

123

In the context of digital game-based maths learning environments 
(maths DGBLE), Dai et al. (2023), used unsupervised machine learning 
(Gaussian Mixture Model), which permitted six clusters of ‘learning-
support-use’ behaviours including skills development, conceptual knowl-
edge, metacognitive connections, metacognitive regulation, information 
selection using cognitive aids, and sustained motivation for necessary 
practices. Thanks to the identiﬁcation of these six clusters of ‘learning-
support-use’ behaviours researchers proposed an adaptive system, which 
has improved learners’ performance in the maths DGBLE environment. 
In DGBL, the affordances embedded in game-based learning tools 
wield signiﬁcant 
interactions within the 
system, and as such, will also inﬂuence the type of learning analytics 
the system can produce. The learner’s perception and utilisation of these 
affordances contribute to the creation of distinct learning analytics. These 
analytics, once generated, serve a dual purpose—they become valuable 
tools for the in-depth analysis of learning activities and, simultaneously, 
facilitate the dynamic adaptation of the DGBL system. This adaptive 
capability 
is pivotal in tailoring the educational experience to indi-
vidual learner needs, enhancing the overall efﬁcacy of digital learning 
environments. 

learner-player 

inﬂuence 

in 

The work of Hallifax et al. (2021) adds depth to this discourse 
through the introduction of a dynamic gamiﬁcation framework. In their 
framework, engagement indicators play a pivotal role, functioning as 
the linchpin for the adaptive capabilities of the DGBL system. The 
proposed framework aligns with the contemporary shift towards person-
alised and engaging educational experiences. By leveraging engagement 
indicators, the system not only gauges learner involvement, but also 
actively adapts, ensuring sustained engagement and fostering an enriched 
learning process. 

In the broader context of educational technology research, the explo-
ration of affordances, learning analytics, and dynamic adaptation mech-
anisms represents a crucial frontier. As technology continues to shape the 
educational landscape, understanding how learners perceive and engage 
with digital tools becomes paramount. This research not only contributes 
implications for
to theoretical frameworks, but also holds practical 

124

M. Romero et al.

educators, instructional designers, and developers seeking to optimise 
digital learning environments for enhanced educational outcomes. 

Discussion 

social, and 

integration of pedagogical, 

The 
technical affordances, 
augmented by AI capabilities, transforms playful learning environments 
into dynamic spaces conducive to effective and personalised learning 
experiences. Emphasising the importance of a balanced approach, this 
chapter underscores the collaborative relationship among these affor-
dances, shedding light on the evolving landscape of AI-enhanced educa-
tion. 

the 

importance of 

We have highlighted 

learning analytics as a 
construct for student progress visualisation and representation 
into 
DGBL. This systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of data 
generated by learners’ interaction with the game environment may lead 
to identifying the root of any misconceptions or lack of prior knowl-
edge that a learner may experience during game play (de Freitas et al., 
2023), thereby deriving meaningful insights into individual and collec-
tive learning patterns, and areas of strength or challenges (Holstein et al., 
2018). Performance metrics through dedicated AI algorithms can track 
progression and completion rates (Kent & Cukurova, 2020), accuracy 
in collaborative problem solving (Sun et al., 2020), or efﬁciency in 
learning through inquiry (e.g. Lameras & Arnab, 2021). It can be argued 
therefore that feedback in AI-driven DGBL, as an affordance, goes 
beyond traditional assessments. It is a dynamic and continuous process, 
providing timely and relevant information to learners and educators 
alike. This particular affordance may increase the quality of the feed-
back process by placing the focus, not only on the informative aspect of 
identifying potential student misunderstandings, but more importantly, 
by generating feedback that is actionable and contributes to a continuous 
improvement cycle. For example, by enabling real-time, formative feed-
back, learner actions may be addressed, analysed, and represented as they 
occur within the game. This immediacy enhances the learning experience 
by providing instant guidance, corrections, reﬂections, or reinforcement,

9 Affordances for AI-Enhanced Digital Game-Based …

125

encouraging positive behaviours, and promptly correcting misconcep-
tions, leading to an increased understanding of the problem and how 
it can be resolved (Mavrikis et al., 2007; Neto & Fernandes, 2019). This 
aligns with the notion of personalisation, afforded by AI, as an extension 
to feedback mechanisms. When tailored to individual learner proﬁles, 
this feedback can target insights that guide learners towards improve-
ments in areas requiring attention. Finally, when affordances are coupled 
with gamiﬁed elements such as achievements, missions, and rewards, and 
aligned with a playful learning environment, they may contribute to a 
positive and immersive learning experience, helping learners to persist in 
their educational journey (Conati & Kardan, 2013; Pareto, 2014). 

References 

Arnab, S. (2020). Game science in hybrid learning spaces . Routledge. https://doi. 

org/10.4324/9781315295053 

Banihashem, S. K., Dehghanzadeh, H., Clark, D., Noroozi, O., & Biemans, H. 
J. (2023). Learning analytics for online game-based learning: A systematic 
literature review. Behaviour & Information Technology, 1–28. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/0144929X.2023.2255301 

Conati, C., & Kardan, S. (2013). Student modeling: Supporting personalized 
instruction, from problem solving to exploratory open ended activities. AI 
Magazine, 34 (3), Article 3. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v34i3.2483 
Dai, C. P., Ke, F., Pan, Y., & Liu, Y. (2023). Exploring students’ learning 
learning: A mixed-methods 
learning and multi-cases study. Computers & 

in digital game-based math 

support use 
approach using machine 
Education, 194, 104698. 

de Freitas, S., Uren, V., Kiili, K., Ninaus, M., Petridis, P., Lameras, P., 
Dunwell, I., Arnab, S., Jarvis, S., & Star, K. (2023). Efﬁcacy of the 4F feed-
back model: A game-based assessment in university education. Information, 
14 (2), Article 99. https://doi.org/10.3390/info14020099 

Gaurav, D., Kaushik, Y., Supraja, S., Yadav, M., Gupta, M. P., & Chaturvedi, 
M. (2022). Empirical study of adaptive serious games in enhancing learning 
outcome. International Journal of Serious Games, 9 (2), 27–42. 

Hallifax, S., Serna, A., Marty, J. C., & Lavoué, E. (2021, April). Dynamic gami-
ﬁcation adaptation framework based on engagement detection through learning

126

M. Romero et al.

analytics. Companion Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on 
Learning Analytics & Knowledge LAK21. 

Holstein, K., McLaren, B. M., & Aleven, V. (2018, June 27–30). Student 
learning beneﬁts of a mixed-reality teacher awareness tool in AI-enhanced 
classrooms. In Artiﬁcial intelligence in education: 19th international confer-
ence, AIED, Proceedings, Part I 19 (pp. 154–168). Springer International 
Publishing. 

Hou, X., Nguyen, H. A., Richey, J. E., Harpstead, E., Hammer, J., & McLaren, 
B. M. (2021). Assessing the effects of open models of learning and enjoy-
ment in a digital learning game. International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
in Education. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-021-00250-6 

Lameras, P., & Arnab, S. (2021). Power to the teachers: An exploratory review 

on artiﬁcial intelligence in education. Information, 13(1), 14. 

Lameras, P., Arnab, S., De Freitas, S., Petridis, P., & Dunwell, I. (2021). Science 
teachers’ experiences of inquiry-based learning through a serious game: A 
phenomenographic perspective. Smart Learning Environments, 8(1), Article 
7. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-021-00152-z 

Lameras, P., Levy, P., Paraskakis, I., & Webber, S. (2012). Blended university 
teaching using virtual learning environments: Conceptions and approaches. 
Instructional Science, 40 (1), 141–157. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11251-011-
9170-9 

Lampropoulos, G. (2023). Augmented reality and artiﬁcial 

in 
education: Toward immersive intelligent tutoring systems. In Augmented 
reality and artiﬁcial intelligence: The fusion of advanced technologies (pp. 137– 
146). Springer. 

intelligence 

Li, Y. C., Yang, K. H., & Chang, C. H. (2023). Development and imple-
mentation of a game-based learning system with real-time facial emotion 
recognition technology. IIAI Letters on Informatics and Interdisciplinary 
Research, 4 , 1. 

Kalmpourtzis, G., & Romero, M. (2020). Constructive alignment of learning 
mechanics and game mechanics in Serious Game design in Higher Educa-
tion. International Journal of Serious Games, 7 (4), 75–88. 

Kent, C., & Cukurova, M. (2020). Investigating collaboration as a process with 
theory-driven learning analytics. Journal of Learning Analytics, 7 (1). https:// 
doi.org/10.18608/jla.2020.71.5 

Mavrikis, M., Maciocia, A., & Lee, J. (2007). Towards predictive modelling of 
student affect from web-based interactions. Proceedings of the 2007 Confer-
in Education: Building Technology Rich 
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
Learning Contexts That Work, pp. 169–176.

9 Affordances for AI-Enhanced Digital Game-Based …

127

Menon, D., & Romero, M. (2020). Game mechanics supporting a learning 
and playful experience in educational escape games. In Global perspectives on 
gameful and playful teaching and learning (pp. 143–162). IGI Global. 

Nadolny, L., Alaswad, Z., Culver, D., & Wang, W. (2017). Designing 
with game-based learning: Game mechanics from middle school to higher 
education. Simulation & Gaming, 48(6), 814–831. 

Neto, A. J. M., & Fernandes, M. A. (2019). Chatbot and conversational anal-
ysis to promote collaborative learning in distance education. 2019 IEEE 19th 
International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT), 
2161-377X, pp. 324–326. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALT.2019.00102 
Pareto, L. (2014). A teachable agent game engaging primary school children 
to learn arithmetic concepts and reasoning. International Journal of Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence in Education, 24 (3), 251–283. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-
014-0018-8 

Proulx, J. N., Romero, M., & Arnab, S. (2017). Learning mechanics and 
game mechanics under the perspective of self-determination theory to foster 
motivation in digital game based learning. Simulation & Gaming, 48(1), 
81–97. 

Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, I., Huang, A., Guez, 
A., Hubert, T., Baker, L., Lai, M., Bolton, A., Chen, Y., Lillicrap, T., Hui, 
F., Sifre, L., van den Driessche, G., Graepel, T., & Hassabis, D. (2017). 
Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 550, 354– 
359. 

Sun, C., Shute, V. J., Stewart, A., Yonehiro, J., Duran, N., & D’Mello, S. 
(2020). Towards a generalized competency model of collaborative problem 
solving. Computers & Education, 143, 103672. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compedu.2019.103672 

Tondello, G. F., & Nacke, L. E. (2018). Gamiﬁcation: Tools and techniques 
for motivating users. In Extended abstracts of the 2018 CHI conference on 
human factors in computing systems—CHI EA 2018. ACM. https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/3170427.3170662 

Tondello, G. F., & Nacke, L. E. (2020). Validation of user preferences 
and effects of personalized gamiﬁcation on task performance. Frontiers in 
Computer Science, 2, 29. 

Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Czarnecki, W. M., et al. (2019). Grandmaster level 
in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41586-019-1724-z 

Yannakakis, G. N., & Togelius, J. (2018). Artiﬁcial intelligence and games. 

Springer.

128

M. Romero et al.

is 

licensed under 

Open Access This chapter 
the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and 
reproduction 
long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons license and indicate if changes were made. 

in any medium or format, as 

terms of 

the 

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons 
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.

