Why, What and How to help each Citizen to
Understand Artificial Intelligence?
Frédéric Alexandre, Jade Becker, Marie-Hélène Comte, Aurelie Lagarrigue,

Romain Liblau, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Jade Becker, Marie-Hélène Comte, Aurelie Lagarrigue, Romain Liblau, et al..
Why, What and How to help each Citizen to Understand Artificial Intelligence?. KI - Künstliche
Intelligenz, 2021, 1-9, pp.1610-1987. ￿10.1007/s13218-021-00725-7￿. ￿hal-03024034v2￿

HAL Id: hal-03024034

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03024034v2

Submitted on 27 Apr 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Why, What and How to help each Citizen to Understand Artificial Intelligence?

Frédéric Alexandre1, Jade Becker4, Marie-Hélène Comte2, Aurélie Lagarrigue2, Romain Liblau4, Margarida Romero3,
and Thierry Viéville1,3.
1 Inria, Mnemosyne team, https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne
2 Inria, Learning Lab https://learninglab.inria.fr and Science Outreach Department,
3 Laboratoire LINE, Université côte d’azur http://univ-cotedazur.fr/laboratories/line
4 Magic-Makers https://www.magicmakers.fr
mailto: thierry.vieville@inria.fr Cc: frederic.alexandre@inria.fr jade.becker@magicmakers.fr marie-helene.comte@inria.fr
aurelie.lagarrigue@inria.fr romain.liblau@magicmakers.fr margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr

Keywords: Artificial intelligence for all, Computational thinking, Open Educational Resources (OERs), MOOC.

Abstract.

A critical understanding of digital technologies is an empowering competence for citizens of all ages. In this
paper we introduce an open educational approach of artificial intelligence (AI) for everyone. Through a
hybrid and participative MOOC we aim to develop a critical and creative perspective about the way AI is
integrated in the different domains of our lives. We have built and now operate a MOOC in AI for all the
citizens from 15 years old. The MOOC aims to help understanding AI foundations and applications,
intended for a large public beyond the school domain, with more than 20000 participants engaged in the
MOOC after nine months.
This study addresses the pedagogical methods for designing and evaluating the MOOC in AI. Through this
study we raise four questions regarding citizen education in AI: Why (i.e., to which aim) sharing such
citizen formation ? What is the disciplinary knowledge to be shared? What are the competencies to develop
? How can it be shared and evaluated? We finally share learning analytics, quantitative and qualitative
evaluations and explain to which extent educational science research helps enlighten such large scale
initiatives. The analysis of the MOOC in AI helps to identify that the main feedback related to AI is “fear”,
because AI is unknown and mysterious to the participants. After developing playful AI simulations, the AI
mechanisms become familiar for the MOOC participants and they can overcome their misconception on AI
to develop a more critical point of view. This contribution describes a K-12 AI educational project or
initiatives of a considerable impact, via the formation of teachers and other educators.

1.

Introduction

All citizens are impacted by digital technologies derived from computer science and this takes a new
qualitative and quantitative turn with what is named artificial intelligence (AI). We must allow everyone to
understand how AI mechanisms work in order to develop a critical and creative perspective towards digital
technologies. For this objective, we develop a participative MOOC aiming to develop computational
thinking competency and machine learning (ML) initiation. The MOOC initiative is inspired by the Finnish
initiative to train 1% of its population on the AI domain [1], but also on the success in providing previous
open access to computational thinking education resources for teachers and citizens not familiar with
computer science. The AI MOOC we introduce in this paper is operated as a citizen training in AI in the
broad sense, intended to a large public beyond the school domain, reaching more than 20,000 participants
with a satisfaction level higher than 90% [2]. Through this initiative we aim to achieve an ubiquitary citizen
university in digital culture and digital sciences [3].

Why (i.e., to which aim) helping everyone to understand artificial intelligence ? Most of us simply use it, do
we need to understand how it works ? As discussed in [27] for kid initiation regarding AI, or pointed out in
[23] at a societal level, and when introducing teaching resources such as [22] the need of “acculturation” is

1

often simply settled as mandatory. This is also true at a more general level for STEM [26]. We agree, but it
is worth making explicit the reason why. Let us point out two reasons:
- With the disruptive behavior of such AI mechanisms, one tends to personify such machines [9,28] or even
put oneself down as “less intelligent” than the machine [23] : This could be a lever for domination (by
humans) able to manipulate such systems, as opposed to critical thinking development (the notion is
discussed in, e.g., [11]). Understanding AI can thus be considered as a mandatory (know-why) social skill.
And we are going to observe that the main issue is related to “fear” : Being unknown and mysterious, AI
was frightening, while thanks to this MOOC, “playing” with AI allows one to make these mechanisms
familiar.
- Applications of these technologies seem endless in potentially all domains, at both an individual and
collective level. We however can obviously consider that one will not be able to innovate without mastering
the “how it works” [23,26] beyond using it as a black-box, because some key behaviors (e.g., adversariality
[9]) are counter-intuitive and must be understood to avoid spurious usage. AI thus yields domain-specific
knowledge (know-what) and technical (know-how) skills, which are mandatory.

1

A step further, while the two previous points intersect with all STEM, AI raises a specific issue: It questions
also our vision of human intelligence [9] by trying to model some cognitive human processes that are not
restricted to computational
thinking [12]. Current models of human creativity, for instance, can be
questioned by AI models [29]. Moreover, when modeling some aspects of algorithmic intelligence, we are
also advancing in a better understanding of human intelligence.

What to share regarding AI popularization is extensively discussed, for youngsters, e.g., in [27]. It is now
well established, e.g., by Druga [18] that starting to “play” (i.e., experiment with and “program”) with such
a system allows one to develop the know-why, know-what and know-how skills pointed out previously.
Available adult formations are more technical, as e.g. with Element of AI [1,25] which is now a worldwide
reference in terms of AI popularization, or are simply “talking about” AI. We however consider that there is
a lack: Adults also need to “play” with AI mechanisms to deconstruct misconceptions and construct
pertinent representations of the underlying mechanisms, as proposed here.

How to share such know-why, know-what, and know-how skills is also already widely reported (see again
[27] for an inventory of existing resources for youngsters, and [25] for a general positioning of our proposal
with respect to the two other major resources). Here the key point is that we consider, following [24], a
MOOC with game based learning components, dedicated to citizen formation as developed in [19] for
another subject. Our pedagogical approach is in link with social learning, and promoting engagement as
studied in [16] : Active learning including unplugged activities (see, e.g., [14]), promoting peer interactions,
proposing “take-away” reusable resources, this with a clear problem-centric learning objective.

In order to report how we answered these three questions, we are going first to explain our position
sketching what is to be shared with everyone and then to detail more concretely in link with 21st century
skills what
is proposed in this formation, before presenting the method and results and discussing
perspectives.

2.

Artificial Intelligence and the 21st century skills

As introduced, AI initiation of everyone is a key regarding what is called 21st century skills as explained in
Fig.1 and developed in [12]. With respect to this disruptive technology we need critical thinking to make
the distinction between beliefs and effective tools, computational thinking skills to understand how it works
in order to understand what happens when using it, problem solving capability to interact with these objects
at the application level, creativity to develop and create our own usage of AI mechanism (and not only
undergo the imposed uses), and collaboration because all this can not be managed alone.

2

1 People often focus on “does AI yield machine intelligence” which is an ill-posed question as
discussed in our supplementary material, whereas the fact machines execute what is considered as
intelligent calls into question what is human intelligence.
2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/21st\_century\_skills

2

Fig. 1. A schematic representation of 21st century skills, from https://margaridaromero.me with permission,
see supplementary material Fig.1bis for a detailed description.

Wondering how a machine would learn to solve such a complex task, comparing natural and artificial
intelligence is also a great opportunity to ask how we, humans, could solve “mechanically” a complex task,
a very interesting way of thinking in a reflective way how a human brain can solve it systematically. This is
in direct link with computational thinking [12], and this aspect is highlighted in the proposed formation.

We detail in the supplementary material the learning objectives of the formation and develop how it is
implemented. Let us simply highlight our specificity: With respect to other offers in the field [1], the
content is less technical (e.g., machine learning programming in Python is proposed only as an extension),
but not only a verbal introduction, while effective activities, including unplugged activities (i.e., without a
computer using low-tech everyday tools), are proposed to understand how-it-works. We not only address
AI at the conceptual level but the learner is engaged in practicing with different programs to learn the
fundamentals of AI. As an example, in Fig.2, we summarize the level of technical explanation given for an
activity using the http://playground.tensorflow.org interface, where participants are invited to build and train
their own small deep neural network to solve a categorization task, while other activities with images or
sounds are proposed, learning by doing.

Fig. 2. The level of technical explanation of the “how-it-works”. Left: An elementary computation (e.g., predicting
whether the person head is feminin or masculin) is implemented via a computation unit (i.e., neurons) taking into
account several input data X (e.g., the hair length, face pilosity, mensurations, …), each up to certain weight W
depending on their pertinence or robustness (e.g., pilosity more than hair length) and combine then before providing an
output y, based on statistical adjustment. Right: Combining many computation units in layers (i.e. deep-network, when
many layers), allows to realize complex robust computations (e.g., face recognition or categorization) providing that
all information has been “put in numbers” (i.e., quantified), with results that can be interpreted at a semantic level by
humans. Images re-edited from https://pixees.fr and https://playground.tensorflow.org.

3

This formation has primary targets and secondary targets: The primary targets are “science outreach
mediatory actors” (médiateur·e·s scientifique, in French), involved in AI K-12 initiation, while many
citizens (e.g., parents of K-12 pupils) used this MOOC in order to transmit what they learnt.

An important aspect is the fact that all materials are open resources, in the sense of [17]. Beyond publishing
under a CC-BY licence, and considering the different aspects of Open Educational Resources (OER) as
reviewed in [20], we share our resources at different levels, enriching the link between OER and MOOC as
stated in [21], with three aspects. Granularization: Embedded in a scenario, our resources are also modular
and have been indexed and re-edited in order to be integratable as components of other scenarios, thus with
suitable documentation to reuse the proposed bean. Contamination: One lever of the formation is the “teach
to learn” paradigm, i.e., invite the learner to share her or his new skill in order to consolidate it, thus making
the resource bean not only “open” but also easily reusable at the level reached by a person finishing the
formation. Collaboration: The formation is not only “asynchronous” but also used in hybrid (online or in
real life) synchronous sessions, raising another challenge: Not only reuse the resource, forking some
resource if needed, including merging to enhance the resource, but also take the opportunity to have a
common use of the resource to collaborate as in Class´Code [4], in a given (geographical or online
structural) territory.

3.

Learning by doing through concrete AI related activities

Each of the three chapters of the course is illustrated by concrete activities that bring learners to train their
own machine learning models and interact with real life applications of AI.

For the first part of what artificial intelligence is, participants develop a first understanding of AI through
training a visual recognition neural network model. In order to frame the activity, we designed an integrated
tool to control the training of the model. This experiment is sequenced in three steps. In the first step the
learners create a model that differentiates between two categories of images by feeding the model images
from a dataset of samples given to them. This first step helps dispel preconceived ideas we have noticed in
children with whom we did this activity such as the idea of an AI is a robot that can recognize anything in
an image. They are led to realize that the AI they have trained can not recognize categories it was not
trained on by testing it on images that do not represent one of the two categories known to the AI. In the
second step the children understand that with few examples the machine learning model struggles to
generalize the concepts represented by the images by testing it on images that match one of the categories
but in a different context or position (a drawing of a lion instead of a photo of a lion for example). The last
step is making them train a model on their own dataset with the classes and examples they choose and find.

The second activity around how AI is developed aims to highlight the central role of data in the making of
machine learning applications through experimenting with biases in datasets. We have created a dataset of
images with two categories: women and men with an obvious bias (women have long hair and men have
short hair). After training a first model with this dataset and seeing it fail, the participants are then invited to
reflect on the wrong inferences and create their own dataset to train a better model. They select data, train
their model, test and iterate until they're satisfied with the result. Then, to emphasize the importance of data,
participants are invited to build datasets to train machine learning models to recognize subjective categories,
for example "cute cat vs ugly cat" and thereby understand the responsibility that fall on the humans creating
AI's and the importance of questioning the data behind the AI applications they might encounter.

The last part about the interactions between AI and humans is illustrated by a series of activities where
children experiment with real life AI applications. They are first exposed to painting generated by a
Generative Adversarial Networks model and the painting made by a human painter the model was trained
on. They are asked to try to differentiate the human paintings from the AI generated paintings. Then they
get to modify the YOLO (You Only Look Once) model using a camera based real time image recognition
model. They finally interact with a chatbot. These activities aim to broaden their understanding of the
applications of machine learning and question how they can help humans.

4

4.

Method and Production

Contents allow us to gain a first understanding of what AI means and what it is not, understand the
principles of machine learning and the crucial role played by data, taking into account the societal issues of
AI. Learners are invited to question themself, beyond preconceived ideas, and really understand the ground
of AI;
perform activities and manipulate AI programs to build their own vision; acquire a minimal
scientific and technical culture (concepts, history of humans and ideas). As an outcome they are able to
discuss the subject, question applications, choose some framework to contribute to the development (or not)
of AI applications:
- Questioning: Deciphering the discourse around AI to move from preconceived ideas to questions on which
to rely to understand.
- Experimenting: Perform activities and manipulate AI programs to make up our own mind, with both
online and unplugged activities [11].
- Discovering: share a minimal culture, scientific and technical, to become familiar with concepts through
the history of humans and their ideas.
- Appropriating: being able to discuss the subject, its applications, its framework with various interlocutors
to contribute to the construction of AI applications.

We produced a hybrid, participative, performative and contaminating training:
- Freely accessible online training course with free of charge attestation of attendance; online exchange
forum, to share and help each other, when training on these subjects; online and in real life hangouts to
extend this sharing and serve local projects on these subjects, all content items being also reusable to derive
and build other resources.
- Hybrid : Because online resources are designed to derive in situ activities. As a consequence, there are no
“time limited sessions” but people join when they want and return when they need.
- Participative : In the sense that not only “scientists and engineers” with professional video and content
producers have co-created the resources, but also “end-users” such as teachers or parents, while the content
is adapted considering the participant feedbacks, including new resources creation (a kind of “wiki” where
participants provide their input via forum messages and we take care of the shaping).
- Performative : Because students are taught to be their own teacher, while helping each other, and we also
consider “how to learn to learn” mechanisms (e.g., find some answers on the web, discover some elements
by themself during problem solving activities).
- Contaminating : Because students are invited to “pay” for this course by … sharing the contents with
people from their surrounding.

Nothing “new” here, just the fact we not only propose a xMOOC “course” but also dedicate enough time
resources to discuss with the participants, beg external person to contribute when needed, and do not
restrain our participation to “our” MOOC but are willing to export also some resources or dialog into other
initiatives of the same kind (e.g., driven by https://www.reseau-canope.fr or other https://classcode.fr
partners), i.e., not only “with us” but also “at the others”, using an approach known as cMooc [16].

This formation is hybrid and each chapter is illustrated by activities that bring learners to train their own
machine learning models and interact with real life applications of AI, as detailed in the previous section.
The formation is also performative and contaminating in the sense that an adult benefits from this training
and then in his-her family or in his-her business, association, structure shares what s-he has discovered with
his or her children or the seniors, or the other way round. Part of the training exercises is to be able to
transmit what has been learned. Which is also a good way to learn. In Fig.3, we show such an activity that
can be redone with family or friends.

5

Fig. 3. Left: The “Nim game” is a simple strategy game in which two players (here a human and the “machine”) take
turns removing (or "nimming") 1, 2 or 3 objects (here rods), the loser making the last nimming. This setup allows us to
understand what an algorithm is (including algorithmic recursivity). Right: This “AI” machine is made of “balls and
bowls” (or any equivalent objects). Each box corresponds to the number of remaining rods. The machine is “trained”
by just putting a red or blue ball, depending on the game issue (win or lose), in the bowl corresponding to each move.
After training, the whole game policy is stored in the “machine” and the artificial player just has to choose what to
play, counting the balls in the corresponding bowl. This allows us to understand what is called “reinforcement
learning”, and why a mechanism can “learn” a non-trivial rule (in fact, “always leaving a multiple of 4 rods”), without
understanding anything. Images from https://pixees.fr as open CC-BY resources.

Regarding unplugged activities, it is often said that we should limit screen time, avoid digital passivity, and
develop critical thinking about the digital world. A paradigm exists in which neither hardware nor software
are required: unplugged computing (see [11] which has an English version as supplementary material for
details). During unplugged or computerless activities , we learn concepts, often by playful activities to
develop computational thinking competence [12] as a way of solving problems, in which computers are not
the end in themselves. Unplugged computing activities have the advantage of not requiring costly
equipment or the skills to operate it, relieving the cognitive cost to invest to make them work, allowing us to
concentrate on the content. It is also the best proposal for so-called “contaminating” activities. In artificial
intelligence initiation, it has also the major advantage to demystify and unpersonify the machine.

3

Concretely the resources (as exemplified in Fig.4) are made of short videos freely reusable, synthetical
texts, quiz to auto-evaluate what has been shared and also to find by yourself some elements, activities
online to manipulate machine learning algorithms via graphical interfaces, and unplugged activities to be
performed in the family, with friends or in educational contexts (as exemplified in Fig.3); such activities are
designed to be also realized by youngers (typically K6 - K12). At last, a mind-map, peer-to-peer corrected,
is proposed in order to summarize what has been learnt via such a key-word graphical representation. A
step further, the forum is an important tool: quiz questions are discussed (some of them have been improved
after the first answers), and notions are re-explained or re-formulated, up to the point of enriching the core
resources with re-writing of shared information: the goal for this citizen formation is to be improved by
citizens.

Fig. 4. Two examples of open reusable resources. Left: One thumbnail of the videos, based on a 3 to 4 minutes dialog
between Guillaume, who is the “citizen”, and a researcher. She answers the question, gives some explanations, and
invites him and us to question, experiment, discover and discuss each topic. Right: An example of the first screen of an
interactive animation, guiding step by step to the discovery of a content, and some manipulation. The key point is that
these resources are modular in order to be reused in other courses developed by the teachers (in the wide sense) using
this resource for their formation. Images from https://classcode.fr/iai as open CC-BY resources.

3 During unplug activities, the learners can take a step back, embodying [13] their learning through
activities involving movement. It aims to develop a socio-critical approach through which the learner and
citizen develops a critical and creative relationship with digital technology, appropriating the concepts and
processes of computational thinking with their entire mind and body. The positive impact of these activities
was studied, for instance by Brackmann and his colleagues [14] on two classes with a control group; they
observed a statistically significant improvement in the children’s performance in computational thinking,
for example, breaking down problems into sub-problems.

6

5.

First Results and Analysis

After three months of activity, more than 13000 persons have been engaged in the AI MOOC (37% female,
62% male, 1% not binary) with more than 1600 persons active (answering to the first quiz) and about 600
persons having completed the full MOOC.
Even if the MOOC massively reaches a French public (79%), the African public is also well represented
(Morocco : 4% ; Senegal, Tunisia, Cameroon, Ivory Coast : 1%). In all, 51 countries are represented.
Participants are mainly active (52% on activity, 14% retired, 12% students, 8% job researcher), mostly at
university level (62% at least master degree in any field, 10% PhD), but rather beginners in the field (59%
full beginners, 38% intermediate non expert).
Working time is 10 to 20 hours on average (about 50% of the people spend from 2 up to 5 hours per week,
during about 3 weeks, while 25% spend less and 25% more), and above 94% of people having their
expectation satisfied (43% fully satisfied), and 82% of them state that they could recommend this MOOC.

These statistics come from a start-of-course (1140 respondents) and end-of-course (217 respondents)
surveys completed anonymously by participants on a voluntary basis. We should note that there is a bias in
this survey since it is expected that it is people who are really invested in MOOC, and probably - as a result
- the people with the best track record, who responded. This survey was presented as a tool to listen to
participants' opinions, allowing us to know them better and improve training over time.

On the forum, more than 500 persons have been or are active while more than 3100 are reading, and there
are about 370 discussions, more than half being on the course contents (e.g., strong versus weak AI,
symbolic versus numeric methods, societal issues, …). More than 10 online hangouts of 30 to 200 persons
have been organized already by one of the 70 partners of the Class´Code project [4], during this covid-19
confinement. Several pieces of this resource start to be reused to build other resources, e.g., to enrich
textbooks and their digital supplementary material.

4

Detailed evaluation results are given in the supplementary material of this paper, leading to following
analysis.

Qualitatively, beyond very nice and encouraging positive feedbacks, through the constant evaluation of the
course by the users, we are invited to take several improvements into account: (i) extend the existing
formation with more operational tutorials, (ii) manage some technical weakness because we integrate state
of the art recent external resources, some still to be consolidated, (iii) complete the existing contents to
better help the learner progression. And we will, since this is a long term open course (probably more than 2
years). We have also a several questions on application domains of AI (i.e., in education, regarding
democracy governance, or disabled assisting tools), which are a bit beyond what we can offer in reasonable
time, because each third party domain requires a lot of prerequisites before considering AI related tools. Our
idea is to offer “plugins” to other courses, i.e., participate regarding AI issues, the first project already in
preparation being on GreenIT. For all these considered extensions, the present course acts as the core
curriculum.

Qualitative observations, reading the different participant feedbacks available in our open data set,
confirms our hypothesis that citizens now have a better understanding of AI. As pointed out, the main
feedback is related to “fear” : Being unknown and mysterious, AI was frightening, while “playing” with AI
allows one to make these mechanisms familiar. At the end, apprehensiveness is still present but regarding
the human use of AI, not about “the” AI itself. Another shift concerns technophoby versus technophily. At
the end, we did not notice than people “changed their mind” but all of then were more “technocritic”, i.e.,
considering that the true answer is in the middle. A step further, several feedbacks concerned the fact “it
does not always work”: We have several pertinent observations from people noticing how easy it could be
to defeat the estimation, not because the algorithm was “wrong” but because the performances were limited,

4 For instance, one of us is also co-author of a “science” textbook for French K11 and K12, the AI initiation
being included in the curriculum of this school teaching.

7

and easily biased by the training data. Regarding soft-skills we have no counter-example at the end of the
course of people still “personifying” AI mechanisms, but these persons may have left the course if too far
from their a-priori convictions. We are not able to really evaluate to which extent the know-why skills really
improved, but can easily report participants to have generally the feeling they did. Regarding know-what
skills, asserted by quiz answers, we have pretty good results, it is clear that this part of the formation has
been successful, with one reservation: Our participants were mainly relatively well educated persons, as
detailed in the appendix, thus were expected to succeed, regarding knowledge acquisition or consolidation.
We also have no precise evaluation of what has been “discovered” (versus already partially known or well
known) but can feedback about several persons “surprised” by a part of what they found. Regarding the
know-how skills, the situation is contrasted and depends whether or not people did have time to invest in
the activities. If yes, results are really good and participants came back with a request to “go further on”.
This is in favor of our assumption that this formation may be a gate towards more technical initiation such
as [1,25]. All together, we can only affirm that self-evaluation and peer to peer evaluations lead to good
results, and to witness that participants have the strong feeling to have a better understanding of AI.

A few participants did not find what they expected, either because they are not interested in redoing
activities with young people (of any age ;)) to better understand or because they were looking for
professional formation. In fact, we mainly reached rather highly educated persons, while we target
popularisation, which seems to be more the case now, but slowly. In both cases, when a person joins, the
content is always considered as accessible, and useful (“good to know”). The hard point is thus convincing
yourself to join. We hope that in real life hangouts and also community approaches will help, and work on
this aspect [5,6].

On our side, we are really delighted to participate on these researcher-citizen exchanges and shares, with
very interesting questions, sometimes on crucial subjects, always kind and moderated (no troll , yet ;)).

5

We also better understand the real educational needs regarding AI foundation and applications. People
clearly first want to clarify their belief about such a topic, understand what is true, what is coming and what
is putative only. They then want to link such knowledge with concrete applications, e.g., what can be done
regarding visual or audio processing, or not. This was easily covered for generic applicative tools, this is
less easy to address for specific domain applications (e.g., justice or medicine) because this strongly
depends on many other specific aspects of how it can be used. They finally are generally surprised but then
highly convinced that they must “play with it” to build their own correct representations, and are rather
proud to succeed.

With respect to other studies on MOOC engagement the present success seems to be related, as expected, to
the “important role that instructors, course resources and pedagogic practices that focus on providing
problem-centric and active learning play in engaging online students” [16] yielding good behavioral,
cognitive and affective engagement, even if the didactic objective is specific but rather wide (here
“understanding AI” with respect to, e.g., learning a given programming language), while peer interactions
were really poor. Further studying this engagement, as performed in, e.g., [16] is a perspective of the
present work.

6.

Conclusion and Perspectives

We have reported on a citizen AI formation, detailing the pedagogical choices
(linking everyday life
elements to fundamental concepts, understanding the "how it works" via online or unplugged concrete
activities, making explicit how understanding the "science underneath" allows to better discuss the societal

5 We only got a bitter exchange about the fact we are very strong on gender equality, e.g., using inclusive
writing (i.e., expliciting both male and female genders in French writing). Gender equality issues are
especially important in the present context, and are omnipresent in our resources. This has been considered
as “too much” by one participant, while several did support our choice.

8

impacts) and the pedagogical method.(e.g.: small conceptual videos, contaminating activities to be redone
in real life, …).

We may consider our offer as the “grown up” counterpart of what is usually proposed to kids [18,22,27],
i.e., a more accessible gate for non technophile targets, as an intermediate step before courses allowing the
use of AI at work, such as [1,25], and as an alternative for more superficial presentation of AI only in
“words”. It seems to cover a real need, as quantified in section 6, and our goal is to really multiply the
audience, either within the MOOC itself or by contributing to other initiatives, thanks to the openness of our
resources.

Regarding AI-K12 education, our experience (including for other connected formations of Class´Code, such
as [2] reviewed in [3]) is that such a MOOC is not directly usable as it. It has however three usages: (i) it
allows the formation of the teachers in the wide sense (including parents, through family activities). (ii) it
provides also reusable resources for these learners to prepare activities. (iii) several modular beans of
resources (videos, interactive animations, self-contained texts) of the MOOC can be exploited by K8-K12
persons in an autonomous way. Building a “MOOC for youth” is another challenge, probably to be designed
on the basis of game based learning MOOCs as studied by one of the co-author [24]. Examples
(unpublished yet) of escape games involving STEM and including AI aspects, that seem to work well have
been reported to us. It is a perspective of our work [30]. The need for the educators to gain a scientific and
technical culture before deploying learning activities, was the first priority.

This “popular education” initiative is a contribution to the idea of a “ubiquitary citizen university in digital
science and culture” [3], i.e., the fact that, beyond schooling, our society has a real need of “formation
throughout life”. And this is something that must be participative, performative and contaminant, in the
sense developed in section 5, contributing to everyone's 21st century education in the sense reviewed in
section 3, regarding AI competencies and beyond.

As next steps, we are going to invite a MSc student to deeply analyze the available learning analytics in
order to better understand how to pursue (for at least two years) this initiative. We also are going, within
the https://www.cai.community project, to further work on the online community aspects, targeting teachers
(we must make a choice in terms of community), and this will drive us toward not only considering
teaching AI, but also teaching the way to teach AI, including using AI frameworks (both symbolic and
numeric) to better model the human learning process.

And for those who still believe that AI will generate a dystopia or some utopia, we will carry on explaining
that this is neither wrong nor true, but a belief (anyone is free to have his or her own belief), and the best
way to clarify, see go further, such belief, is to understand intelligently artificial intelligence.

Acknowledgements The Digital Direction for Education of the French Ministry, the French Digital University
Engineering and Technology, Microsoft, EducAzur, for funding 4 minutes 34, S24B l’interactive, Magic-Makers,
DataBingo, La Ligue de l’enseignement, Université de Nantes, La Compagnie du Code, for contributions and all
Class´Code partners.

Declarations

Funding: The https://classcode.fr/iai formation has been co-funded the Learning Lab Inria, the Digital Direction for
Education of the French Ministry (name “DNE”), the French Digital University Engineering and Technology (name
“UNIT”) and EducAzur, one resource has been co-funded by Microsoft-Education.

Conflictual or competing interests: Not applicable for the non-commercial “common good” reported here: This free
access ressources set is also not, up to our best knowledge, in concurrence with any other equivalent commercial
product.

Availability of data, material and code availability: All resources are available under CC-BY or CC-BY-NC-SA

licences and the platform software is open-source under the CeCILL-C (a French declinaison of the GNU-GPL).

9

References

1.
2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

A free online introduction to artificial intelligence for non-experts, https://www.elementsofai.com, last accessed 2020/05/31

Mariais, C., Roche, D., Farhi, L., Barnabé, S., Cruchon, S., de Quatrebarbes, S., Viéville, T. EIAH'19 Wokshop : Apprentissage
de la pensée informatique de la maternelle à l’Université : retours d’expériences et passage à l’échelle, Paris, France (2019)
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02145466v2
Atlan, C., Archambault, J.P., Banus, O., Bardeau, F., Blandeau, A. et al.. Apprentissage de la pensée informatique : de la
formation des enseignant·e·s à la formation de tou·te·s les citoyen·ne·s. EIAH'19 Wokshop - Apprentissage de la pensée
informatique de la maternelle à l’Université : retours d’expériences et passage à l’échelle, Paris, France (2019)
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02145480v1
The Class´Code https://classcode.fr online reusable formation https://classcode.fr/iai, last accessed 2020/05/31
Corieri, P., Romero, M., Massart, T., Goletti, O., Mens, K., et al.. Enjeux dans la création d'une communauté d'enseignants
engagés dans l'apprentissage de l'informatique. Didapro 8 - DidaSTIC - Colloques francophones de didactique de
l’informatique, Lille, France (2020) https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02426274v1
Romero, M., Lefèvre, S.-C., Viéville, T. When a Master of Sciences on EdTech becomes an International Community. ERCIM
News, (2020) https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02418510v1
Searle,J.-R, Minds, Brains and programs, The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 3, Cambridge University Press, (1980).
Wolpert, D.H., Macready, W.G., "No Free Lunch Theorems for Optimization", IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation 1, 67. (1997)
Ganascia, J.G. Le mythe de la Singularité : faut-il craindre l’intelligence artificielle ? Éditions du Seuil, Collection Sciences
Ouvertes, (2017)
Rougier N. Demystify artificial intelligence: Challenges and history of artificial intelligence, Class´Code popularization video
and text (2018) https://pixees.fr/demystify-artificial-intelligence
Romero, M., Duflot-Kremer, M.,, Viéville T.. Le jeu du robot : analyse d’une activité d’informatique débranchée sous la
perspective de la cognition incarnée. Review of science, mathematics and ICT education, Laboratory of Didactics of Sciences,
Mathematics and ICT, Department of Educational Sciences and Early Childhood Education - University of Patras.
Wing, J. M. Computational thinking. IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC), 33.
IEEE. (2011).
Tsarava, K., Moeller, K., Pinkwart, N., Butz, M., Trautwein, U., & Ninaus, M. Training Computational Thinking: Game-Based
Unplugged and Plugged-in Activities in Primary School. European Conference on Games Based Learning, 687–695. (2017).
Brackmann, C. P., Román-González, M., Robles, G., Moreno-León, J., Casali, A., & Barone, D. Development of computational
thinking skills through unplugged activities in primary school. Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Primary and Secondary
Computing Education, 65–72. ACM. (2017).
Romero, M. Les compétences pour le XXIe siècle. Usages créatifs du numérique pour l’apprentissage au XXIe siècle, 15-28,
Chap2. (2017)
Hew, K. F. Promoting engagement in online courses: What strategies can we learn from three highly rated MOOCS. British
Journal of Educational Technology, 47(2), 320-341. (2016)
Baker, Fredrick W. (2017). “An Alternative Approach: Openness in Education Over the Last 100 Years.” TechTrends 61 (2):
130–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-016-0095-7.
Druga, Stefania. (2018). “Growing up with AI : Cognimates : From Coding to Teaching Machines.” Thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/120691.
Hudson, Lorraine, Gerd Kortuem, Annika Wolff, and Patrina Law. (2016). “Smart Cities MOOC: Teaching Citizens How to
Co-Create Smart Cities.” In . Amsterdam, The Netherlands. http://oro.open.ac.uk/46951/.
Iii, Fredrick W. Baker, and Dan Surry. (2013). “Open Education Designs: A Taxonomy for Differentiating and Classifying Open
Learning Environments.” In , 189–94. Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE).
https://www.learntechlib.org/primary/p/48090/.
Jemni, Mohamed, Kinshuk, and Mohamed Koutheair Khribi, eds. (2017). Open Education: From OERs to MOOCs. Lecture
Notes in Educational Technology. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-52925-6.
“Machine Learning for Kids.” n.d. Accessed January 12, (2021). https://machinelearningforkids.co.uk .
Minichiello, Federica. (2019). “L’acculturation à l’intelligence artificielle : l’urgence d’une prise de conscience.” Revue
internationale d’éducation de Sèvres, no. 81 (September): 12–15. https://doi.org/10.4000/ries.8538.
Romero, Margarida. (2013). “Game Based Learning MOOC. Promoting Entrepreneurship Education.” Elearning Papers,
Special Edition MOOCs and Beyond 33 (January): 1–5.
Roos, Temuu, and Victor Storchan. (2020). “Formation à l’IA – Épisode 1 : Elements Of AI,” January.
https://www.lemonde.fr/blog/binaire/2021/01/12/formation-a-lia-episode-1-elements-of-ai/.
Suwahyo, Bayu Widyaswara. (2020). “Problems of Computational Thinking, Teaching, and Learning in a STEM Framework: A
Literature Review.” In , 180–85. Atlantis Press. https://doi.org/10.2991/assehr.k.201214.233.
Touretzky, David, Christina Gardner-McCune, Fred Martin, and Deborah Seehorn. (2019). “Envisioning AI for K-12: What
Should Every Child Know about AI?” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 33 (01): 9795–99.
https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33019795.
Lopatovska, Irene, and Harriet Williams. (2018). “Personification of the Amazon Alexa: BFF or a Mindless Companion.” In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Human Information Interaction & Retrieval, 265–68. CHIIR ’18. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3176349.3176868.
Abiteboul, Serge, and Gilles Dowek. (2017). Le temps des algorithmes. Humensis.
Barnabé, Sabrina, Lola Denet, Mathieu Manrique, Divya Menon, Éric Pascual, Margarida Romero, and Thierry Viéville. (2020).
“A Low-Cost Tabletop Set-up to Collect Learning Analytics during Computational Thinking Unplugged or Tangible
Activities.” Inria.

10

7.

Supplementary material: Detailed presentation of 21st century skills.

Fig. 1. A detailed representation of 21st century skills, from https://margaridaromero.me with permission.

11

8.

Supplementary material: Understanding intelligently Artificial Intelligence.

6

Artificial Intelligence is “the science of making machines do things that would require intelligence if done
by [human]” (Marvin Minsky 1968). This definition is very interesting because it does not address the issue
of whether a machine is “intelligent ” or not, which is an ill-posed question [7], but defines a mechanical
process with respect to (what we consider as) human intelligence. On the contrary, the emergence of AI
mechanisms question what we consider as intelligent, for a human intelligence. Do large mental arithmetic
skills demonstrate human intelligence ? A century ago, the answer was crealy yes, to the point of proposing
public performances, while pupils were heavily trained, and mental calculators were in great demand in
research centers. Nowadays pocket or smartphone calculators make the job and we know it is mainly the
mechanical application of algorithms. The fact
is that not only numerical calculations have been
mechanized, but complex symbolic operations manipulating symbols and relation between symbols (so
called, “symbolic” AI) and also complex numerical processes (so called, “numeric” AI) yielding
mechanisms to transform speech to text, categorize and or locate objects in pictures, and so on, up to
implementing high-level specific cognitive functions algorithmically.

7

What is to be learned ?

Three key-points have to be made explicit :

- Firstly, very efficient transformation mechanisms (e.g., speech to text read out ) can be realized without
“understanding a word” of what is said, being able to process information does not mean that information
makes sense.

8

- Secondly, implemented methods, especially in symbolic algorithms (e.g., symbolic calculation ), can be
in total disruption with respect to the corresponding human mental processes.

9

- Thirdly, it is generally accepted that the more specific the task is to solve, the most efficient the algorithm
10
will be, “general” problem solver cannot in theory be performant [8].

We consider that sharing such epistemological ideas is crucial to help everyone build an unbiased vision of
what is called AI.

6 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligence
7 Including non-intuitive sophisticated ones such as https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trachtenberg\_system

8 Regarding speech-to-text, it appears that our speech decomposes in a few units of sound that distinguish
one word from another in a particular language (phonem), about 50 (11 to 141 depending on the language).
They form words (we use about 1000 to 3000 words daily, among 10000 to a bit more that 50000). In other
is not that huge, and the fact that speech-to-text systems now work pretty well,
words, the combinatorial
detecting phonemes and using powerful and complicated statistical modeling systems, mainly demonstrates
that “read out” does not require to “understand” the speech. Interesting enough, and contrary to image
recognition, the speech-to-text systems architecture does not borrow much from our understanding of the
corresponding neurophysiological processes. Furthermore, “brute force” statistical calculations surpass
sophisticated signal processing approaches.

9 A lot of mathematical algebra is now performed using algorithms of “computer algebra”, so that
mathematical engineers delegate most of the calculation to the machine, concentrating on reasoning and
is that the computer algebra mechanism can be very far from the human
concepting. The key point
treatment of the same problem (e.g., polynomial factorization is performed over finite fields of increasing
cardinality and not using rewriting rules as a human would do). Furthermore, this requires completely
different skills, such as understanding symbolic algebra, reformulating the problem in an algorithmic way,
interpreting the result or non result. A step ahead, the disruption is even greater with theorem prover and
program formal validators.

10 The contribution of
the so-called “no free lunch” theorems is that it tells us choosing an appropriate
algorithm requires making assumptions about the kinds of target functions the algorithm is being used for
(introduce as much a-priori
information as possible), whereas with no assumptions, no "meta-algorithm",
such as the scientific method, performs better than random choice.

12

In order to develop a critical and creative agency towards the way AI is changing our society and everyday
life, these new tools that deeply change our society and everyday life, it is also important to understand
“how it works”. We now learn creative programming at school, and this is the lever for understanding the
digital world. Based on this scientific culture it is easy to explain the difference with AI mechanisms:

Regarding numerical AI, the system is “programmed by the data”. Very general algorithms with a lot of
parameters can implement very specific but different functions by adjusting these parameters on a training
data set (either explicitly when supervising the training, or more implicitly when either providing a positive
or negative reinforcement reward or adjusting the parameters on the data set structure without supervision).
Programming paradigm consists of designing an architecture with suitable algorithmic modules, setting up a
learning process and feeding it up with data. This is the case for numerical data or symbolic knowledge.
This explanation illustrates the technical level chosen to explain AI mechanisms to everyone.

A step further, believing that a machine can be built to be (or to become by itself) “globally intelligent” is
neither wrong nor true: It is a belief [9], and we are all of us free to believe (or not) this could or will
happen. Furthermore, when considering this notion of intelligence, the concept is often mixed with the
notion of intentionality or self-awareness . This belief is a recurrent human myth , but also a scientific
assumption of “global AI feasibility”, that has driven years of research, without concrete achievement on
the main subject itself, but very fruitful side effects [10]. Understanding AI is also a way to develop critical
thinking in relation to the field of AI, as discussed in the next section.

12

13

14

11

Implementing these learning objectives.

At a more concrete level the formation curriculum has been organized in three sections.

- What is artificial intelligence? In order to gain a first understanding of what AI means and what it is not,
including historical aspects. One pedagogical key point here is to insert between human intelligence and
machine intelligence, animal intelligence, i.e., compare natural and artificial intelligence. Such an approach
is not the most frequent, but really helps to think differently about AI. A real place to symbolic AI (e.g.,
formalization of knowledge, e.g., for the semantic Web) is also given, not only because it is an important
domain, regarding the applications, but also because it helps to better understand how we humans can
formalize our knowledge. The reasons why we can be frightened (or unboundly optimistic) by AI is also
discussed.

- How to develop artificial intelligence? Here, machine learning and data programming is introduced,
without mathematics, but detailed enough in order to understand the principles of machine learning and the
crucial role played by mastering data sets. Care is taken to explain all the abscons words (e.g., “deep
learning” ? simply the fact a large number of calculation layers is pipe-lined from the input at the bottom to
the output on the top (thus yielding a deep architecture) is used to obtain a compact calculation). As detailed
in the next section, all notions are discovered “by doing” through activities.
A large part of the section is devoted to data, their uses, the related risks (e.g., privacy, bias) always
explaining how it works, to allow each of us to construct her or his own vision and opinion.

- Artificial intelligence at our service? Beyond the scientific and technical aspects, this section aims at
better understanding the issues and the levers, in order AI to really be at the service of people. Beyond

11 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intentionality
12 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consciousness and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qualia

13 In a nutshell, the notion of “human machine”, that slavish works for us (untill uprising), starts with slavery
where humans are reduced to machines, and many ancient mythologies, and most modern religions include
artificial people (e.g. golems, Pinocchio or the Frankenstein’ creature), while automata already exists in
ancient civilizations before nowaday modern “robots” (from “robota”, i.e., forced laborer).

14 To be entirely exact, the correct falsifiable scientific assumption is “global AI cannot exist” and the
research objective is to refute this assumption. What is called “AI winters” [10] is not simply a defeat of the
“global AI” dream, but an “epistemological break” in the Gaston Bachelard sense, allowing the emergence of
actual powerful scientific productions.

13

myths and rhetoric manipulation . Attention is paid to make the distinction between what is already there
(even if we do not notice it), what is coming, and what is hypothetical. The better understanding offered by
the two previous sections makes really sense here. Some applications are detailed, some others are to be …
invented. The question is also raised about when we do not need AI.

15

15 Let us illustrates these two aspects by a saying “if a AI robot with AI beats you, be sure that, “hidden”
behind, a human takes advantage” as explained in [9], GAFAMs are act as “pyromaniac firefighters”, who
launch great debates on very hypothetical aspects of artificial intelligence while they impose, from now on,
disruptive algorithms of artificial
intelligence, without any discussion. Another aspect is some “rhetorical
shift”: For instance, we discussed a lot of autonomous vehicles (which obviously will not work after a great
craze due to hazardous media ads), and while we waste time discussing "the dangers or benefits of
autonomous vehicles” we miss asking the real question “do we need autonomous vehicles or are there other
transportation emergencies?”.

The autonomous vehicle already exists: to avoid any risk it is run on specific tracks, to facilitate driving we
put guide rails, to save energy we make collective vehicles, they can even drive automatically, it carries a
name: it's called a train.

14

9.

Supplementary material: details on the evaluation result

10.

Fig. 1. Participant Profile. A. Gender ; B. Age ; C. School Level ; D. Current Occupation ; E. Geographic pattern.
Statistics come from a start-of-course (1140 respondents) survey completed anonymously by participants on
a voluntary basis.

15

Fig. 2. Interest for the MOOC and AI. A. Interest in the MOOC ; B. Knowledge on AI. Statistics come from a
start-of-course (1140 respondents) survey completed anonymously by participants on a voluntary basis.

16

Fig. 3. Participant Satisfaction. A. Global ; B. For each content type. Statistics come from an end-of-course (217
respondents) survey completed anonymously by participants on a voluntary basis.

17

