New journal for reproduction and replication results
Etienne Roesch, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Etienne Roesch, Nicolas P. Rougier. New journal for reproduction and replication results. Nature,
2020, 581 (7806), ￿10.1038/d41586-020-01328-2￿. ￿hal-02564844￿

HAL Id: hal-02564844

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02564844

Submitted on 6 May 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Correspondence about: In praise of replication studies and null results, Nature 578, 489-490 (2019). 
Link: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00530-6 

The educative nature of replication studies 
Etienne B.Roesch (School of Psychology & Clinical Sciences, Centre for Integrative and Neurodynamics, 
University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom), e.b.roesch@reading.ac.uk 
Nicolas Rougier (Inria Bordeaux South West Research Centre, Talence, France), nicolas.rougier@inria.fr 
Contact: e.b.roesch@reading.ac.uk 

Not only are replications studies “important”, as explained in Nature 578, 489-490 (2020) [1], they 
also have a fundamental role for education. Students are typically involved in experiencing research 
first-hand. However, mirroring the world outside their curriculum, they also ambition to design novel 
experiments and hunt for significant, ground-breaking results, as their theoretical grasp and 
analytical skills are still developing. 

Reproductions (of methods) and replications (of results) [2], we posit, offer an opportunity to acquire 
a rounded experience of research, from pre-registration to publication, ultimately training better 
scientists. Perhaps more importantly, this exercise would show generations of scientists to come that 
it is okay to spend time learning by studying someone else’s results. 

If most academic disciplines are now sensitive to issues of reproducibility, however, this has yet to 
translate into better structures: e.g. only about 3% of psychology journals state explicitly that they 
accept replications [3] and mistaking high-impact publications for measures of achievement plagues 
PhD training [4]. The successful incorporation of replication studies into daily routine, and embracing 
null results, require that this kind of work regains nobility, that incentive structures change, and 
scientists rediscover the joy of learning: learning for the sake of in-depth understanding and 
experiencing wonder. 

To host replication studies and null results, there exists a journal dedicated to the publication of 
computational replication (ReScience C) and a new journal for the publication of experimental 
reproduction and replication (ReScience X) will be launched during Summer 2020. These peer-
reviewed outlets provide an ideal remit for high-quality student work, and an invaluable support to 
the foundation of scientific endeavor. Of course, in the best of all possible worlds, we would not 
need such initiatives; academic journals publishing a study would subsequently be responsible for 
publishing reproductions and replications of that study, the so-called Pottery Barn model. 

References 
[1] In praise of replication studies and null results, Nature 578, 489-490 (2019). 
[2] Peng, R. D. Reproducible research and Biostatistics. Biostatistics 10, 405–408 (2009). 
[3] Martin, G. N. & Clarke, R. M. Are Psychology Journals Anti-replication? A Snapshot of Editorial 
Practices. Front. Psychol. 8, (2017). 
[4] Look beyond publications in assessment of PhDs. Nature Human Behaviour 3, 1001–1001 (2019). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
