Different learning architectures contribute to value
prediction in human cognition
Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre. Different learning architectures contribute to value prediction in human cognition.
AIC 2018 : 6th International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Cognition, Jul 2018, Palermo,
Italy. ￿hal-01931492￿

HAL Id: hal-01931492

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01931492

Submitted on 22 Nov 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Diﬀerent learning architectures contribute to
value prediction in human cognition

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre1,2,3

1Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200 Avenue de la Vieille Tour, 33405 Talence, France
2LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, Talence, France
3Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives, Universit´e de Bordeaux, CNRS, UMR
5293, Bordeaux, France
frederic.alexandre@inria.fr

Abstract. Pavlovian conditioning plays a fundamental role in our cog-
nitive architecture, by its capacity to bind values to stimuli. Due to the
multifarious characteristics of this learning mode, many approaches in
machine learning have been proposed to implement it in artiﬁcial intelli-
gence models. Considering the complementary properties of these models
and inspired by biological evidences, we propose not to select the best
model but rather to combine them, thereby forming a cognitive archi-
tecture. From a functional point of view, we report the good properties
and performances of this architecture. From a methodological point of
view, this work highlights the interest of deﬁning a cognitive function at
the algorithmic level, binding its general properties to its implementa-
tion details. It is also proposed that it is a fruitful approach to decipher
and organize many information extracted by modern approaches in neu-
roscience, towards the deﬁnition of a global cognitive architecture.

Keywords: Value prediction, Bio-inspiration, Competiton, Cognitive
architecture

1

Introduction

Having particularly in mind the brain performing a cognitive function, D. Marr
[28] has argued that, to be fully understood, an information processing system
must be examined at three diﬀerent levels of description. The function itself
can be globally described at the computational level. The representations and
the processes used to implement the function are described at the algorithmic
level. The way of computing them are described at the implementational level.
This later level, refering to the brain, corresponds to the brain circuitry but Z.
Pylyshyn [35] has proposed a similar tri-level description in a purely cognitive
purpose and has simply deﬁned the lower level as the functional architecture.

The decomposition is interesting because it makes it clear that not a unique
algorithm can carry out the function and not a unique circuit can implement the
algorithm. This decomposition is also interesting in the framework of artiﬁcial

2

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

intelligence because it helps structuring steps to build a model. On one side is
the cognitive function to model. On the other side are formalisms available (e.g.
neuronal computations). In between are probably the more critical and impor-
tant steps: deﬁning the structures and the sequences of information processing
to bridge both sides (e.g. neuronal architecture and learning rules). The classical
approach in artiﬁcial intelligence is top-down: from a cognitive function to be
modeled, an algorithm and its implementation in a certain formalism are pro-
posed. The approach can be also bottom-up, particularly if the problem is set
in computational neuroscience: from experimentally observed neuronal circuits
and mechanisms, it is questioned which ones are active to emulate the cognitive
function generally associated to the neuronal region.

In this paper, having in mind this decomposition, I extend a series of works
performed in my team to model pavlovian conditioning from diﬀerent points of
view, in order to propose a new view of this fundamental learning mode, with
an impact on cognitive modeling as well as artiﬁcial intelligence and machine
learning.

2 Pavlovian conditioning

Pavlovian conditioning [33] is an elementary learning process, present in most
species, by which an animal learns to predict biologically signiﬁcant stimuli an-
nouncing pain or pleasure (called Unconditioned Stimuli, US, e.g. some food)
by some other stimuli (called Conditional Stimuli, CS, e.g. a bell ringing before
food delivery) that anticipates its venue.

This learning paradigm has been extensively studied in behavioral neuro-
science because it is easy to observe (US anticipation is associated to other so-
called pavlovian responses like salivation in the appetitive case and freezing in
the aversive case) and not so simple as it might appear: Many experiments have
demonstrated that pavlovian learning is not a simple associative process mea-
suring the contingencies between the US and the CS [24]. For example, when an
association is learnt and extinguished, it is more rapid to be learnt again. Some
authors have proposed that during the process, latent causes are extracted [13].
Others have stressed the role of the context [39]. As a results, after a century
and thousands of publications, many data have been accumulated, many models
have been proposed but pavlovian learning remains not fully understood.

It is also important to underline that pavlovian conditioning has a prominent
role in cognitive modeling and in the domain of Artiﬁcial General Intelligence,
because it gives the capacity to link values to objects and events of the environ-
ment and this capacity is important in a cognitive-oriented description of intelli-
gent behavior. For example, in a general description of cognition [4], one central
module is concerned with declarative memory, providing facts and knowledge
about the world, in which goals can be deﬁned and sensorimotor associations
can be elaborated, thus forming other central modules. All these modules heav-
ily rely on the elementary capacity to predict aversive and appetitive values for
CS from the innate detection of US. Some cues to elaborate the CS might come

Learning architectures for value prediction

3

from declarative memory and the US correspond to the main behavioral goals
for most animals. This capacity is then extended to conditioned reinforcers [7],
corresponding to intermediate goals like, in humans, tools or money, and at the
basis of categorization [5] and of judgments [22] used in strategies and more
generally in decision making and planning.

In this paper, we propose to study pavlovian conditioning from two diﬀerent
points of view. On the one hand, from a top-down machine learning point of
view, we will wonder how it is possible to associate the CS and the US. In other
words, the question is to associate the perception of external stimuli like the
CS, also called exteroception, to the internal perception of pain or pleasure, also
called interoception, as it is the case with the US. We summarize some more or
less classical strategies at the algorithmic level in the next section.

On the other hand in computational neuroscience, we have modeled some
neuronal structures and circuits that are reported to play a fundamental role
in pavlovian conditioning. This particularly concerns the amygdala, a primitive
neuronal structure in the medial temporal lobe and its main aﬀerences. We
summarize in the following the main results of our study in a bottom-up way
and explain how we integrate these pieces of information towards a more global
understanding of pavlovian conditioning, at the algorithmic level and how this
can be more generally proﬁtable for cognitive modeling.

3 Modeling pavlovian conditioning in Machine Learning

In the domain of machine learning, pavlovian conditioning has often been as-
sociated to supervised learning. In its simplest aspect, it corresponds, when a
stimulus is perceived, to predict the occurrence of the US and the learning can
consequently be supervised by the fact that, some milliseconds later, the US is
perceived or not. Even if some binary models have been proposed, predicting
the magnitude of the US (for example the size of the reward or the intensity of a
painful electric shock) is the main purpose of the learning rule. In that aspect, it
is interesting to note that one of the main learning rules proposed for pavlovian
conditioning by Rescorla and Wagner [36] is similar to the main learning rule
setting the bases of supervised learning in neural networks, proposed by Rosen-
blatt for the Perceptron [38]. They both set the focus on a multiplicative term,
called error for the perceptron and surprise for pavlovian learning, correspond-
ing to the diﬀerence between the predicted and the computed US. This term
(null if there is no error, thus ensuring the stability of the rule) also explains
that there is no learning when the US is already predicted, including by other
CS. Importantly, this has been observed in experimental situations in a famous
paradigm called blocking, increasing the interest for this rule.

Nevertheless, for the same kind of structural reasons as the perceptron, the
Rescorla-Wagner learning rule has some limitations, particularly related to the
complexity of the decision that can be taken in the input space. Concerning the
perceptron, it has been shown that its learning rule guarantees the convergence
towards a unique minimum value of error, but this results in a good quality of

4

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

the learnt solution only in case of linear separability in the input space [30]. Con-
cerning pavlovian conditioning, it has been observed that some mammals can
answer to some combination of two variables (x and y) called positive (x AND
y) et negative (x XOR y) patterning, diﬀerently than the corresponding com-
bined eﬀect of each variable, raising the idea to create conﬁgural representation
(representing the co-occurrence of x and y), able to provide a diﬀerent eﬀect.
This principle of conﬁgural learning proposed in [39] resulted in that paper in
the same idea of adding hidden units as in the multilayer perceptron, to propose
a model of pavlovian conditioning able to perform such complex decision.

The idea of performing error-driven learning in multilayered networks has
been made possible in Machine Learning by the back-propagation learning algo-
rithm which allows to make emerge internal representations in the hidden layers.
Even if some biologically plausible learning rules have also been proposed [31],
the main visible eﬀect of this algorithm is rather today in the huge developments
about deep learning [25], which make the learning of any complex association
aﬀordable by a deep network. Nevertheless, as it can be seen in the diﬃcult
steps of parameter tuning in these networks, there is no proof of convergence in
this case and, instead of looking for the best solution, mastering this technol-
ogy rather corresponds to obtaining a satisfactory solution in a satisfactory time
length.

It is also often forgotten that the only strong theoretical result about lay-
ered network is the fact that removing one layer can require to exponentionally
increase the size of the previous layer [16]. To tell it diﬀerently, it is possible
to approximate any separation with a unique hidden layer and a random ﬁxed
connection from the input to the hidden layer (but possibly with a very large
hidden layer). This has for example been experimentally studied in [6], showing
that the function learnt by complex deep networks can be eﬃciently approxi-
mated by a simple network with a unique (and large) hidden layer. It is only
supposed that the projection to the hidden layer is likely to make emerge the
useful internal representations, to be linearly separated for the targeted deci-
sion. A strategy when the corresponding knowledge is available, is to directly
send the pertinent information to the hidden layer, else the solution is to use
random projections and the possibility to create pertinent information becomes
very likely when the layer is very large. In summary, the main advantage of deep
networks is to have what is called a compact representation (because requiring
less neurons), when the representation is elaborated hierarchically, as compared
to a ﬂat representation, but this is at the price of a less stable representation.

In a completly diﬀerent view, it is often neglected in Machine Learning that
associative memories can provide a kind of supervised learning. Associative mem-
ories are these kinds of recurrent networks, like the Hopﬁeld network [18], that
are able to learn “by heart” some prototypes as stable states and, in a recall
phase, to consider a new input and stabilize on the closest state stored before-
hand. This process is called auto-association, since the network is shown to be
able to associate a pattern (the new input) with itself (seen as the closest pro-
totype learnt by heart before). This is generally considered useful in Machine

Learning architectures for value prediction

5

Learning when the new input has been corrupted by noise and when the recall
is a way to denoise this input.

This process can easily be extended to hetero-association. In this case, just
consider a series of i vectors Vi as the concatenation of subvectors Xi and Yi and
consider that these vectors are learned as prototypes in an associative memory.
The principle of this learning process is that a noisy Vj will be reconstructed
to the closest Vi learned before. If, in the vector Vi, the noise corresponds to
set Yi to zero and let Xi unchanged, then the recall will reconstruct the missing
part Yi and will consequently act in hetero-association, which can be seen as a
kind of supervised learning, even if in this case there is no generalization and
the network converges towards a pattern already stored before.

Several other characteristics of this learning process must be underlined. On
the one hand, it is interesting because it is very rapid and presenting only one
time a prototype is suﬃcient to memorize it (as opposed to layered perceptrons
learning slowly). On the other hand, it can be considered weak because it is
subject to interference (close prototypes can create spurious states combining
these prototypes) and saturation (learning too many prototypes can lead to a
catastrophic forgetting) [12].

4 Modeling pavlovian conditioning in Computational

Neuroscience

Concerning the implementation of pavlovian conditioning in the brain, the amyg-
dala is a neural structure generally considered to play a central role in this pro-
cess [26]. The structure is composed of a set of nuclei, including the basolateral
nucleus for sensory inputs and the central nucleus expressing pavlovian motor
responses. Observing direct plastic connections between these sensory and motor
nuclei [11] is a good argument to propose a shallow layered architecture to model
this network. Particularly, the lateral part of the basolateral nucleus has been
reported to represent elementary CS, selected in its aﬀerences from the thalamus
and primary sensory cortex [26], whereas the basal part receives aﬀerences from
more integrated regions like associative sensory cortex and hippocampus [14].

A functional analogy with a model like the simple perceptron can be also
evoked for the amgdala, since signals corresponding to error of prediction have
been observed in the network [27]. Such error signals are known to be carried
by neuromodulators, which can act at the learning and functioning levels in the
amygdala but also in other cerebral structures. This is the case for acetylcholine,
considered to tag errors due to stochasticity in the environment [42] and acting
to balance the activity between the lateral and basal sensory nuclei [8], but also
to trigger memorization in the hippocampus [15] and shift selective attention in
the higher regions of the sensory cortex [32]. To better understand the putative
role of neuromodulation on these structures, let us ﬁrst evoke the participation
of the structures to pavlovian conditioning.

The basal nucleus of the amygdala receives inputs from the associative sen-
sory cortex [26]. In the visual case for example and in a large region going from

6

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

the primary visual cortex to the inferotemporal cortex, this path has been de-
scribed as a layered architecture, extracting more and more abstract cues to
create categories for visual recognition [41]. Based on biological observations, it
has also been proposed that the release of acetylcholine plays a prominent role
for transmitting an error signal, as an attentional signal fed back throughout the
architecture and some models have been proposed accordingly, as a biological
implementation of a kind of error backpropagation [37].

The hippocampus is also known to be a major input of the basal nucleus of
the amygdala [26], generally considered to provide information about the context
of the task, that can play an important role in discrimination. This is consistent
with the fact that the hippocampus is known to perform arbitrary binding of its
inputs, collected in the entorhinal cortex from main sensory regions of the cortex,
and to learn these associations through a recurrent network to form a so-called
episodic memory [40]. Recently, we have also proposed that the hippocampus
might in fact associate interoception and exteroception in its inputs, making it
a perfect candidate for learning the vector CS-US in heteroassociation [19] and
recalling US when the CS is presented alone. In a more computational study
[20], we have also shown that this organization is in fact beneﬁcial to resist to
interference.

The complementary roles in learning of the cortex and the hippocampus have
already been theoretized [29]. Whereas the cortex is able to learn slowly cues
important for discrimination and generalization, the hippocampus has a diﬀerent
learning mode, allowing to learn quickly, by heart, some speciﬁc conﬁguration
to be remembered. In the case of the amygdala, this should correspond either to
extract cues in the cortex to learn some features of the CS or, when this results
in an error of prediction, to learn by heart the global sensory conﬁguration
in the hippocampus and to store it as a special case to be remembered. It is
consequently interesting to remind now that acetylcholine release triggers storing
in the hippocampus.

With the aim of integrating all these elements in a unique picture, we begin to
report preliminary work we did to model pavlovian conditioning in the amygdala
[9]. Our main goal was to evaluate which of the many standard rules proposed for
pavlovian conditioning [24] was the most faithful, as compared to biological data.
What we proposed, in short, is that several populations with diﬀerent behavior,
recently reported in the basolateral nucleus [17], receive diﬀerent kinds of cues,
each kind reported to be important in some classic rule of pavlovian learning.
In addition, we proposed that, consistent with the fact that several populations
with diﬀerent excitatory and inhibitory roles have also been recently described
in the central nucleus of the amygdala [11], the behavior actually expressed by
the amygdala is in fact the result of the competition between diﬀerent lines of
elementary sensorimotor association in the amygdala. In conclusion, contrarily
to rules from experimental psychology, becoming more and more complex as they
want to model pavlovian conditioning, taking more and more facts into account,
we propose in [9] that the same complexity of behavior can be expressed by the
simple competition between diﬀerent lines of association, underlying the role of

Learning architectures for value prediction

7

neuromodulation to favor some lines over others, depending on the context or
the recent history of behavior [3].

One step further, what we propose in this paper is not to forget that cues
arriving in the sensory input of the amygdala are themselves learnt in other
regions. This is consequently a wider view, proposing to model pavlovian condi-
tioning in a network of neuronal structures and to consider that critical events
in the network can trigger important learning or functioning steps in diﬀerent
locations throughout the network. In this view, as it was already proposed in [9],
the amygdala seen as a simple perceptron decides which US to predict from a
variety of inputs received in the basolateral nucleus. These inputs can correspond
to simple elementary CS coming from the thalamus or to more elaborated hints
or conﬁgurations learnt in other cortical areas or in the hippocampus. Possibly,
a release of acetylcholine will give a stronger weight to complex inputs, meaning
that the environment is too noisy to rely on simple cues.

This mode of learning is incremental in the sense that, at the beginning,
it can be supposed that hardly no complex cues have been extracted in the
hippocampus or in the highest levels of the cortex. Errors of prediction will
result in neuromodulation triggering learning in the hippocampus of the speciﬁc
cases poorly considered before. Later on, if the same case occurs again, it will
trigger recall in the hippocampus that will reconstruct the corresponding US and
send it back to the amygdala. Concerning learning in the layered architecture
of the cortex and in addition to bio-plausible mechanisms proposed in [37] and
mentioned above, the phenomenon of consolidation must be also evoked. In this
process, also reported in neuroscience and described in [29], the hippocampus can
act as a supervisor to the cortex and send it some examples previously learned
by heart in episodic memory, in order to transfer it to semantic memory in the
cortex. As far as we know, no stable learning rules have been proposed so far
to implement this important learning process, but this will be very important
to consider in the future because it might allow to remove examples in the
hippocampus and prevent it from saturation.

5 Discussion

The capacity for an intelligent agent to associate a sensory state (taken in the
widest sense, including more or less abstract multimodal and contextual informa-
tion) to a value (particularly representing its possible contribution to achieving
the current goal of the agent) is very desirable to deﬁne in a cognitive archi-
tecture. It can be paralleled, in natural cognition, with pavlovian conditioning
linking a state (more or less abstract stimulus, context) to the unconditioned
stimulus it predicts, annoucing a pain or a pleasure. In the living, this learning
has been shown to contribute both to declarative and implicit memories [40].

In this paper, we have summarized pavlovian conditioning as the capacity to
associate a vector representing the sensory state with a vector representing the
anticipated internal state and we have evoked three classical strategies in ma-
chine learning to learn this kind of association, each with its respective strengths

8

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

and weaknesses. Shallow layered networks ensure a quick processing and optimal
learning but only for simple direct associations. In contrast, deep layered net-
works can learn complex associations, which is particularly useful to elaborate
internal representations, concepts and abstractions, but at the price of a very
long learning that can fall in local minima and must choose pertinent conﬁgua-
tions. Of completly diﬀerent nature is the elaboration of associative memories in
recurrent networks. Prototypes can be learned by heart, possibly in one shot but
are sensitive to interference and globally an associative memory can be subject
to saturation.

From this global analysis, one strategy is to look for the best compromise;
another one is to try to beneﬁt from the strengths of all. In the previous section,
we have argued to show that the brain exploits this latter strategy. Whereas
pavlovian conditioning can be summarized as an implicit sensorimotor learning
taking place in the amygdala and associating simple cues to pavlovian responses
related to the predicted US, this cannot explain all the observed pavlovian as-
sociations and other inputs to the amygdala carrying other kind of information
must be also considered. This is particularly the case for inputs coming from the
hippocampus and from high cortical areas and learned and processed in these
structures with diﬀerent criteria. What we have also made clear here is that
these structures are also dependent on the processing made in the amygdala and
particularly on neuromodulation released from its errors of prediction.

This system of combined learning occuring in diﬀerent sites in parallel but
also for common reasons can be interpreted from a phylogenetic point of view.
In primitive animals, only simple associations can be learnt [23]. With evolution,
experience from recent episodes and association of multimodal information can
be integrated to the pavlovian association.

It is of course also very tempting to extrapolate this interpretation and the
related observations to the domains of cognitive modeling and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence. Proposing models based on the cooperation of memories is not new in
these domains [1, 29] and relates to the design of ensemble or multi-method ap-
proaches. This must be more and more seriously considered, since new technolo-
gies in experimental neuroscience allow to observe that most evolved cognitive
functions are in fact elaborated from an interplay between neuronal structures
[34]. In the present case, this gives an elegant way to introduce speciﬁc cases
to an associative process with no loss of generalisation. Using hidden layers to
elaborate conﬁgural representations is not mandatory, as it has been reminded
that a simple layer could perform the same task (at the price of a larger hidden
layer), but it is interesting for using internal representations for other purposes.
This hierarchy of hidden layers provides a level of abstraction (not obtained
by a shallow network) that could be exploited for other cognitive function and
particularly for declarative memory and for executive functions.

We have also mentioned up to which point neuromodulation plays an impor-
tant role in associating the processing and learning phases in the neuronal struc-
tures, and can be seen as a rare ground of coordination between the otherwise
parallel processes. In the future, we plan to better understand their functions

Learning architectures for value prediction

9

[2] and we have already proposed some mechanisms to decipher some tempo-
ral aspects of pavlovian conditioning [21] and to go beyond, towards operant
conditioning and associated high level cognitive functions [10].

To conclude on a more methodological point of view and coming back to
Marr’s levels of description [28], we have presented some top-down approaches
in Machine Learning and bottom-up approaches in computational neuroscience,
forming the state of the art on the current understanding of pavlovian condition-
ing. We demonstrate here that synthetizing these analyses by the algorithmic
level is a unique way to propose new interpretations and to revisit cognitive
modeling on this topic.

10

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

References

1. Alexandre, F.: Biological Inspiration for Multiple Memories Implementation and
Cooperation. In: In V. Kvasnicka P. Sincak, J. Vascak and R. Mesiar, editors,
International Conference on Computational Intelligence (2000)

2. Alexandre, F., Carrere, M.: Modeling Neuromodulation as a Framework to In-
tegrate Uncertainty in General Cognitive Architectures. In: The Ninth Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial General Intelligence. New-York, United States (Jul 2016),
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01342902

3. Alexandre, F., Carrere, M., Kassab, R.: Feature, Conﬁguration, History : a bio-
inspired framework for information representation in neural networks. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Neural Computation Theory and Applications. Rome, Italy
(Oct 2014), https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01095036

4. Anderson, J.R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M.D., Douglass, S., Lebiere, C., Qin, Y.: An
integrated theory of the mind. Psychol Rev 111(4), 1036–1060 (Oct 2004), http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.111.4.1036

5. Ashby, F.G., Alfonso-Reese, L.A., Turken, A.U., Waldron, E.M.: A neuropsycho-
logical theory of multiple systems in category learning. Psychological review 105(3),
442–481 (Jul 1998), http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9697427

6. Ba, J., Caruana, R.: Do Deep Nets Really Need to be Deep? In: Ghahra-
mani, Z., Welling, M., Cortes, C., Lawrence, N.D., Weinberger, K.Q. (eds.) Pro-
ceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Conference, NIPS 2014,
pp. 2654–2662. Curran Associates, Inc. (2014), http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
5484-do-deep-nets-really-need-to-be-deep.pdf

7. Belova, M.A., Paton, J.J., Morrison, S.E., Salzman, C.D.: Expectation modulates
neural responses to pleasant and aversive stimuli in primate amygdala. Neuron
55(6), 970–984 (2007)

8. Calandreau, L., Triﬁlieﬀ, P., Mons, N., Costes, L., Marien, M., Marighetto, A.,
Micheau, J., Jaﬀard, R., Desmedt, A.: Extracellular hippocampal acetylcholine
level controls amygdala function and promotes adaptive conditioned emotional
response. The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬃcial journal of the Society for Neu-
roscience 26(52), 13556–13566 (Dec 2006)

9. Carrere, M., Alexandre, F.: A pavlovian model of the amygdala and its inﬂuence
within the medial temporal lobe. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 9(41) (2015)
10. Carrere, M., Alexandre, F.: Modeling the sensory roles of noradrenaline in ac-
tion selection. In: The Sixth Joint IEEE International Conference Developmental
Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (IEEE ICDL-EPIROB). Cergy-Pontoise / Paris,
France (Sep 2016), https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01401882

11. Ciocchi, S., Herry, C., Grenier, F., Wolﬀ, S.B.E., Letzkus, J.J., Vlachos, I., Ehrlich,
I., Sprengel, R., Deisseroth, K., Stadler, M.B., Muller, C., Luthi, A.: Encoding of
conditioned fear in central amygdala inhibitory circuits. Nature 468(7321), 277–282
(Nov 2010), http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature09559

12. French, R.M.: Semi-distributed representations and catastrophic forgetting in con-

nectionist networks. Connection Science 4(3-4), 365–377 (1992)

13. Gershman, S.J., Blei, D.M., Niv, Y.: Context, learning, and extinction. Psycholog-
ical review 117(1), 197–209 (Jan 2010), http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
20063968

14. Goosens, K.A., Maren, S.: Contextual and Auditory Fear Conditioning are Medi-
ated by the Lateral, Basal, and Central Amygdaloid Nuclei in Rats. Learning &
Memory 8(3), 148–155 (May 2001)

Learning architectures for value prediction

11

15. Hasselmo, M.E.: The role of acetylcholine in learning and memory. Curr Opin

Neurobiol 16(6), 710–715 (Dec 2006)

16. Hastad, J., Goldmann, M.: On the power of small-depth threshold circuits. Com-
putational Complexity 1, 113–129 (1991), https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01272517
17. Herry, C., Ciocchi, S., Senn, V., Demmou, L., Muller, C., Luthi, A.: Switching on
and oﬀ fear by distinct neuronal circuits. Nature 454(7204), 600–606 (Jul 2008),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature07166

18. Hopﬁeld, J.J.: Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective com-
putational abilities. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA. pp.
2554–2558 (1982)

19. Kassab, R., Alexandre, F.: Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive informa-
tion within the hippocampus: a computational study. Frontiers in Systems Neuro-
science 9(87) (2015)

20. Kassab, R., Alexandre, F.: A Modular Network Architecture Resolving Memory
Interference through Inhibition. In: et al., J.M. (ed.) Computational Intelligence,
Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol. 669, pp. 407–422. Springer (2016),
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01251022

21. Kaushik, P.S., Carrere, M., Alexandre, F., Raju, S.B.: A biologically inspired neu-
ronal model of reward prediction error computation. In: 2017 International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks, IJCNN 2017, Anchorage, AK, USA, May 14-19,
2017. pp. 3577–3584 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2017.7966306
22. L., A.G.: Human contingency judgments : Rule based or associative. Psychological

Bulletin 114(3), 435–448 (1993)

23. Laberge, F., Muhlenbrock-Lenter, S., Grunwald, W., Roth, G.: Evolution of the
Amygdala: New Insights from Studies in Amphibians. Brain Behav Evol 67(4),
177–187 (2006), http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000091119

24. Le Pelley, M.E.: The role of associative history in models of associative learn-
ing: a selective review and a hybrid model. The Quarterly Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology 57(3), 193–243 (Jul 2004), http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
02724990344000141

25. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G.: Deep learning. Nature 521(7553), 436–444 (May

2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14539

26. LeDoux, J.: The amygdala. Current Biology 17(20), R868–R874 (Oct 2007)
27. Li, S.S., McNally, G.P.: The conditions that promote fear learning: Prediction error
and Pavlovian fear conditioning. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory 108(0),
14–21 (2014)

28. Marr, D.: Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation
and Processing of Visual Information. Henry Holt and Co., Inc., New York, NY,
USA (1982)

29. McClelland, J.L., McNaughton, B.L., O’Reilly, R.C.: Why there are complementary
learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes
and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological review
102(3) (Jul 1995), http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7624455

30. Minsky, M., Papert, S.: Perceptrons: An Introduction to Computational Geometry.

MIT Press, Cambridge (1969)

31. O’Reilly, R.C., Munakata, Y.: Computational Explorations in Cognitive Neuro-
science: Understanding the Mind by Simulating the Brain. The MIT Press, 1 edn.
(Sep 2000), http://www.worldcat.org/isbn/0262650541

32. Pauli, W.M., O’Reilly, R.C.: Attentional control of associative learning–a possible
role of the central cholinergic system. Brain Research 1202, 43–53 (Apr 2008)

12

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

33. Pavlov, I.P.: Conditioned Reﬂexes (V.Anrep, trans.). London: Oxford University

Press” (1927)

34. Paz, R., Bauer, E.P., Par´e, D.: Measuring correlations and interactions among four
simultaneously recorded brain regions during learning. Journal of neurophysiology
101(5), 2507–2515 (2009), http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.91259.2008

35. Pylyshyn, Z.W.: Computation and Cognition. MIT Press (1984)
36. Rescorla, R., Wagner, A.: A theory of pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the
eﬀectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In: Classical Conditioning II:
Current Research and Theory, pp. 64–99. Appleton Century Crofts (1972)

37. Roelfsema, P.R., van Ooyen, A.: Attention-gated reinforcement learning of internal
representations for classiﬁcation. Neural computation 17(10), 2176–2214 (2005),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/0899766054615699

38. Rosenblatt, F.: The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage and
organization in the brain. In: Anderson, J.A., Rosenfeld, E. (eds.) Neurocomputing:
Fundations of Research (1989), pp. 89–92. The MIT Press (1958)

39. Schmajuk, N., DiCarlo, J.: Stimulus conﬁguration, classical conditioning and the

hippocampus. Psychological Review 99, 268–305 (1992)

40. Squire, L.: Declarative and nondeclarative memory: multiple brain systems sup-
porting learning and memory. Journal of cognitive neuroscience 4(3), 232–243
(1992), http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23964880

41. Thorpe, S.J., Fabre-Thorpe, M.: Seeking Categories in the Brain. Science

291(5502), 260–263 (Jan 2001), http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1058249

42. Yu, A.J., Dayan, P.: Uncertainty, Neuromodulation, and Attention. Neuron 46

(2005)

