Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence Michel
Durampart, Philippe Bonfils, Margarida Romero

To cite this version:

Michel Durampart, Philippe Bonfils, Margarida Romero. Digital
Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence. Creative
Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Springer Nature
Switzerland, ￿hal- pp.45-56, 2024, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and
Culture, ￿10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4_4￿. 04593571￿

HAL Id: hal-04593571

https://hal.science/hal-04593571

Submitted on 29 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

4

Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

Michel Durampart, Philippe Bonfils, and Margarida Romero

Abstract This chapter examines AI integration in education, concen-
trating on acculturation, as a broad movement of appropriating digital
tools. The chapter emphasises principals’ involvement in supporting AI
potential in schools and the complex interplay between digital tech-
nology and education. The chapter describes teachers’ transition from
personal to educational digital use across three phases of digital
accultur- ation. It emphasises professional development by highlighting
problems and motivations. The last part of the chapter discusses digital
accul- turation in AI and education, including medical expertise,
vocational training, and special education. It ﬁnishes by analysing
educational

M. Durampart (B) · P. Bonﬁls Université de Toulon, Toulon, France
e-mail: michel.durampart@univ-tln.fr

P. Bonﬁls e-mail: philippe.bonﬁls@univ-tln.fr

M. Romero Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France e-mail:
margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr; margarida.romero@unice.fr

© The Author(s) 2024 A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative
Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education, Palgrave Studies in
Creativity and Culture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4_4

45

46

M. Durampart et al.

platform organisational changes and AI’s ability to change learning
dynamics and interfaces, raising new considerations about global educa-
tion systems.

Keywords Acculturation · Digital culture · Educational technologies ·
Digital competencies

Introduction

The uses of educational technologies, of which artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) is a part, require a pedagogical reﬂection on the planning and
orchestra- tion of the learning activities. The representations and the
culture of the actors, teachers, and students can impact the school
organisation and are points to be taken into account in the integration
of AI in educa- tional settings (Bellas et al., 2023). This chapter
pursues two objectives: on the one hand, to deﬁne acculturation to AI as
a vast movement of appropriation of digital tools; and, on the other
hand, in the light of the work of the Mediterranean Institute of
Information and Communication (IMSIC), to analyse the digital
acculturation in the AI era.

Acculturation is deﬁned in broad terms as “the processes by which
different cultural groups adapt to one another” (Brown & Zagefka, 2011,
p. 131), but also the process of adoption of cultural artefacts such as
digital technologies and the reduction of the digital divide of certain
cultural groups (Vassilakopoulou & Hustad, 2023). The process of
acculturation in the context of artiﬁcial intelligence concerns not only
edtech professionals but the different educational stakeholders who,
having developed their careers absent of AI, are now adapting to new
educational practices and different types of teaching and learning
processes.

Digital Acculturation from the Lens of Information and Communication
Studies

Information and communication sciences have helped to highlight that the
relationship between digital technology and education is complex,

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

47

iterative, and cross sectional (Bonﬁls, 2020; Durampart, 2016; Giraudon
et al., 2020). In this context, researchers from the IMSIC research lab
found that digital artefacts intended for learning activities (Bernard
et al., 2018) tend to cause tensions within the school organisation.
School organisation is highly structured in secondary education, which
creates a tension when innovative approaches are required to adapt to
the opportunities afforded by AI. In this context, Meyer et al. (2023)
consider the importance of the principal’s role in ensuring that the
school’s pedagogical team is able to create the necessary conditions for
change.

Over the course of twelve years of research at the IMSIC labora- tory,
we found the concept of digital acculturation to be useful in
classifying the broad movement of appropriation of digital technolo-
gies inﬂuencing pedagogy and educational practices. This concept arose
as a useful heuristic in order to characterise an unstable, discontin-
uous, and diverse movement that encompasses the adoption of digital
technology across a wide range of activities and approaches within the
educational context. In this way, scholars working on such topics recom-
mend thinking about “digital acculturation” rather than “digital
culture” (Durampart, 2016). The primary challenge lies in integrating
this osten- sibly digital culture within the framework of economic and
social well-being, where digital inclusion encompasses the broader
capacity of individuals to effectively mobilise these technologies—a
critical skill as the knowledge economy continues to expand its inﬂuence
(Duram- part, 2016). While it is difﬁcult to recreate the breadth of the
disciplines and initiatives in which we have been involved, we can
retrace a few signiﬁcant steps and milestones that have helped us better
comprehend the concept of digital acculturation.

The studies of Pélissier et al. (2018) shows that only a minority of
students exploit their “digital culture” with a view to integration and
professional orientation, while showing the potential to consider
creative pedagogies for improving the learners’ experience. Even if
formal learning is crucial to reduce the variance in proﬁciency levels
among social actors, it remains necessary for them to develop new
creative practices in the use of AI in contexts other than those related
to leisure and interpersonal relationships. The challenge of digital
acculturation would therefore refer

48

M. Durampart et al.

to a form of unstable, heterogeneous and disseminated economic, social,
and cultural capital. It is constantly called into play and questioned,
with different modes of adoption, in various contexts, while also
referring to successive or alternating forms of formal and informal
stacked learning.

The Three Levels of Digital Acculturation

impetus for IMSIC’s research projects on digital acculturation The
derived from a study carried out as part of the Provence-Alpes-Côte
d’Azur (PACA) region’s ICT observatory (Pélissier et al., 2013). Further
insights were gathered from the Numécole project, an initiative from the
Ministry of National Education to identify the digital uses of
technology among French teachers with the aim of improving student
outcomes and facilitating teachers’ pedagogical practices (Durampart,
2016) It is from these projects that we developed the following
framework to better understand the role of digital acculturation and its
role in effectively navigating and utilising digital tools. This
framework comprises three distinct levels; the acquisition of
technological knowledge, the interac- tion between personal and
professional uses of technology, and the use of technology in
pedagogical practices.

First Level of Digital Acculturation

At the initial level of digital acculturation, teachers utilise digital
tools for personal use rather than for interchange or sharing. The ﬁrst
stage of digital acculturation is concerned with knowledge acquisition
through training. 82% of instructors between the ages of 31 and 50
(repre- senting 77% of our respondents) completed pre-service teacher
training.1 73% of them claim they use technology frequently, but 68%
complain about insufﬁcient training overall. Again, these teachers are
more likely to

1 The data derives from a Numécole research program occuring between
2014 and 2016. A questionnaire was sent to teachers in November 2015
with the aim of providing a quantitative analysis of experimentation
with digital applications in the PACA region. Over 200 teachers
responded representing 80 classes.

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

49

utilise information and communication technology (ICT) as a personal
tool than as a tool for trade or sharing. Examples include software
trials, do-it-yourself projects, self-learning, as well as shared
learning in co- learning and multi-learning circumstances. These
encounters, charac- terised by a variety of demands and expectations
aimed at simplifying everyday life, serve as barriers to implementing
these talents profession- ally. As a result, the absence of professional
training makes developing an advanced degree of expertise impossible.

Second Level of Digital Acculturation

The integration of digital technology at the second level of digital
accul- turation seeks to promote the interaction between school and home
and puts a range of technological applications at the service of
educational activities. This level is situated in an unsuccessful
relationship between private, personal, and domestic learning and those
of the professional or educational world. The so-called innovative
digital initiatives (Project Incubateurs, 2018–2019) are part of a
worldwide ambition to employ digital media to enhance continuity between
school and home.

However, moving digital applications from the private to the profes-
sional realm requires rehabilitation and instructional supervision. As
one teacher commented on her survey, “The tablets are entering the
establishment (i.e. schools) because they have entered our lives”
(Duram- part, 2016). This teacher also highlighted the importance of
combining tablet use with an effective method of information retrieval
to maximise the devices’ potential in the classroom. This phenomenon,
known as porosity, refers to the permeation of digital technology into
the school environment, directly impacting the organisation of schools.

Third Level of Digital Acculturation

The third level of digital acculturation involves teaching using digital
technologies and includes the use of digital tools in education. Here
again, the Numécole project was used to conduct extensive observa-
included observations at tions on digital

learning. This programme

50

M. Durampart et al.

Toulon’s underprivileged high schools and middle schools, study days
with teachers, and a variety of digital incubator projects. The
questions that emerged from these observations reﬂect the study’s
shifting focus from how digital tools are used to examining the speciﬁc
interfaces from which these tools are accessed and interacted. Teachers
participating in the Numécole experiment describe their professional
uses of digital tech- nology as word processing (90% of teachers),
audiovisual documents (86%), web browsers (72%), teacher-created
software or documents (69%), educational websites (62%), desktop
publishing (49%), digital encyclopaedias (41%), online institutional
resources (37%) and spread- sheets (18%), image and text edition (49%),
and digital workspaces (43%).

The Numécole study also explored the motives and orientations that
underpin the relationship between digital devices and teaching.
Generally speaking, teachers’ pedagogical practices are rather
disciplinary (75%), although they indicate that they address
cross-curricular method- ological skills as soon as feasible (74%).
Their biggest teaching challenge is student autonomy (77%). Individual
and differentiated work prevail (77% and 56%) in classrooms where
autonomous students are preferred (82%). The majority of participants
also reported that they preferred to have student desks facing a
blackboard (53%). Given this context, survey teachers declared that
their main goals for using digital technology in the classroom were, in
descending order of frequency: pedagogical differentiation,
individualisation of learning, motivation, gamiﬁcation, media variation
(colours), test preparation, and media and information education.

linked

We offer a critical method for studying the transformations caused to
new the emotive, (Collet et al., 2021) of

by new educational media and digital mediations technologies. Digital
acculturation helps us evaluate psycho-cognitive, and pragmatic changes
teachers the rationalisation of learning that might be revived through
the use of AI. Numécole instructors have proposed several ways to
include ICT in instruction. These include the didactic approach,
knowledge transmis- sion, cognitive approach (80% of respondents ranked
it ﬁrst or second), school as intelligence development, the citizenship
approach (school as a

facing mechanisation (Moeglin, 1993) and

and students

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

51

place of socialisation), the cultural approach (school as a place of
cultural integration), and the professional approach (school as a place
to prepare for professional integration).

Digital Acculturation Within the Integration of Digital Technologies at
School

We see acculturation as a paradigm for investigating the integration of
digital technology in the classroom. Innovative programmes have been
part of educational methods or dynamic initiatives, funded by the
university, and present in teaching practices, for nearly 15 years.
Students are stuck between contradicting injunctions and demands such as
libera- tion, autonomy, individuation, involvement, commitment, support,
and aid. They also include reintegration and accompaniment, which are
seen as novel and stimulating dynamics provided by digital tools and
technology.

We discovered in the Incubator programme that students saw school
activities incorporating digital technology as an extension of their
initia- tives outside of the classroom. They continued to work in groups
outside of class hours in order to develop transversal abilities.
Knowing how to work as a team provided students with a higher level of
autonomy, which is necessary for gaining subject-speciﬁc information.
Across all observa- tions, teachers stressed the contribution of digital
tools in shaping the prevalent pedagogy by challenging routines and work
habits and helping to break down existing barriers. Despite the
time-consuming nature of technology, these tools permit the analysis of
behavioural patterns and work habits and aid in decompartmentalisation.

Finally, digital acculturation is a concern of gaps between the usage
and mastery of digital technology for both instructors and learners. It
is also a question of the growth of the school form and, more widely,
the educational environment, as well as a component of socio-cultural
behaviours related with the usage of digital technologies (Kabuto &
Harmey, 2019).

Digital acculturation is also the prospect of discovering new instruc-
tional strategies to involve students in techno creative activities
(Romero

52

M. Durampart et al.

et al., 2017). It is less about utilising technology and more about
discov- ering how it may help create a deep knowledge of the United
Nations’ 2030 sustainability and development objectives jointly. In this
regard, Faller and Heiser’s (2022) CurriQvidéos device depicts several
courses of action by ﬁrst-time teachers who explain how digital tools
(pedagogical robots, microcontrollers, etc.) and today’s AI (using, for
example, Google Teachable Machine, VittaScience, or 5J5IA) could be used
to engage students in participatory activities that preserve natural and
cultural heritage (Heiser et al., 2021). Finally, participating in the
acculturation process implies an interest in the unstabilised evolution
of education in reaction to, with, and by digital technology. This
interaction is pedagog- ically led rather than assuming that the
formation of digital citizenship would occur without deliberate
involvement.

Perspectives for Digital Acculturation with Regard to the Perspectives
of AI in Learning and Education

In this section we explore how resources and perspectives associated
with AI issues might challenge, redirect, or redeﬁne the observed level
of digital acculturation. Originally, a Médipath programme (Collet et
al., 2021) outside of an educational context enabled us to measure the
issues at stake during the reorientation of medical proﬁciencies linked
to time savings and the facilitation of expertise. A programme within
higher education and professional learning in the naval ﬁeld (E-DEAL)
envis- ages the modalities of transfer and acculturation to industrial
digital practices gathered around the concepts of industry 4.0. Data
manage- ment and the integration of AI are becoming training issues in
their own right as a result of business transformations through the
inte- gration of these technologies. This research project also
questions the representations and culture of industry players regarding
the potential learning analytics (Lang et al., 2017; Siemens, 2013) in
of AI and terms of proﬁling, individualisation of training paths,
empowerment, and accentuation of self-learning practices for communities
of learners

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

53

in vocational training. Other insights emanating from special education
show that, while digital technologies may crystallise tensions inherent
in the ﬁeld of social work, they are also able to support learners’
perfor- mance, particularly in mathematics and reading (Bonjour &
Daragon, 2019). This is signiﬁcant given that many social workers ﬁnd
themselves unable to achieve these objectives. As such, AI offers
support possibilities for cognitive and behavioural remediation for
people with speciﬁc needs (Hopcan et al., 2022).

On the side of resources in educational platforms, questions oriented
towards the evolution of organisational forms lead us to question the
educational perspectives of AI. As educational platforms continue to
incorporate AI technologies, there is an inherent need to reconsider how
educators and learners adapt to and engage with the data gener- ated by
these tools. The challenges of AI in education seem to be oriented
towards the identiﬁcation of learning dynamics and contexts and the
proﬁling, identiﬁcation, and strategic construction of data, in order to
initiate forms of learning centred on autonomy, self-training, and
communities of learners in collaboration with teachers. These envi-
ronments also establish the vision of a new performance of interfaces
and mediations, supposedly experiential and efﬁcient, in an approach
that links the exploitation of artefacts, data, and new processes. We
start from the challenges of translating AI into the ongoing digital
acculturation with questions about the limits, constraints, and aporias
in the educa- tion system or on forms of learning. It is then possible
to consider AI as a break in continuity. Its integration into school or
training environ- ments still provokes speeches, debates, and past
invocations, all of which ﬁnd new vigour in the experiences and
approaches related to AI and, at the same time, stimulate new issues or
tensions at the heart of the world’s education systems.

54

M. Durampart et al.

References

Bellas, F., Guerreiro-Santalla, S., Naya, M., & Duro, R. J. (2023). AI
curriculum for European high schools: An embedded intelligence approach.
International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education, 33(2),
399–426. Bernard, F., Beyaert-Geslin, A., Bouchardon, S., Bouillon,
J.-L., Cerisier, J.-F., Chabert, G., Chaudiron, S., Damian-Gaillard, B.,
Douyère, D., Fleury, B., Galibert, O., Garcin-Marrou, I.,
Gimello-Mesplomb, F., Jacobi, D., Lafon, B., Legendre, B.,
Leleu-Merviel, S., Marchand, P., Marcon, C., & Zacklad, M. (2018).
Dynamique des recherches en sciences de l’information et de la
communication.

Bonﬁls, P. (2020). Repenser l’ingénierie pédagogique à l’aune de la
pandémie? Distances et médiations des savoirs [En ligne], Rubrique
Débats 31| 2020, mis en ligne le 16 octobre 2020.

Bonjour, A., & Daragon, E. (2019). Information et données ouvertes: Un
bien commun mis à mal dans les établissements et services sociaux et
médico-sociaux? Presses Universitaire de Nancy.

Brown, R., & Zagefka, H. (2011). The dynamics of acculturation: An
inter- group perspective. In Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 44, pp. 129–184). Academic Press.

Collet, L., Durampart, M., Heiser, L., & Picard, L. (2021). Enjeux
expérien- tiels de l’utilisation de l’IA en anatomopathologie.
Communiquer. Revue de communication sociale et publique, 33, 26–44.

Durampart, M. (2016). La forme scolaire en action traversée par

l’école numérique. Revue française des sciences de l’information et de
la communication (9).

Faller, C., & Heiser, L. (2022). Croiser l’évaluation de compétences
didac- tiques et numériques sur un même support: Un déﬁ à relever dans
un enregistrement vidéo (CurriQvidéo) en Master Enseignement Éducation
et Formation du premier degré. Médiations et médiatisations, 9, 91–108.

Giraudon, G., Guitton, P., Romero, M., Roy, D., & Viéville, T. (2020).

Éducation et numérique, Déﬁs et enjeux . Inria.

Heiser, L., Faller, C., & Bonjour, A. (2021). Rendre accessible,
valoriser et préserver le patrimoine naturel et culturel via des
pratiques technocréatives en enseignement moral et civique. Retour
d’expérience du dispositif de formation des professeurs des écoles
CurriqVidéo. Axe 2 séminaire IMSIC.

4 Digital Acculturation in the Era of Artificial Intelligence

55

Hopcan, S., Polat, E., Ozturk, M. E., & Ozturk, L. (2022). Artiﬁcial
intelligence in special education: A systematic review. Interactive
Learning Environments, 31(10), 1–19.

Kabuto, B., & Harmey, S. (2019). Literacy in a global context:
Educational policy, pedagogy, and teacher education. Global Education
Review, 6 (2), 1– 4.

Lang, C., Siemens, G., Wise, A., & Gasevic, D. (Eds.). (2017). Handbook
of learning analytics (1st ed., p. 23). Society for Learning Analytics
and Research (SoLAR).

Meyer, J. G., Urbanowicz, R. J., Martin, P. C., O’Connor, K., Li, R.,
Peng, P. C., & Moore, J. H. (2023). ChatGPT and large language models in
academia: Opportunities and challenges. BioData Mining, 16 (1), 20.

Moeglin, P. (1993). Le paradigme de

la machine à enseigner. Études de

communication. langages, information, médiations, (14), 103-91.

Pélissier, M., Dechamp, G., & Romero, M. (2018). Le tournant créatif à
l’université: Quelles modalités? Quels enjeux? Quelles légitimités?
https://archiv esic.ccsd.cnrs.fr/sic_01823990

Pélissier, M., Pérocheau, G., Siarheyeva, A. A., & Collet, L. (2013).
Cultures

numériques et trajectoires d’insertion professionnelle chez les 16-24
ans . Enquête ObTIC. Université de Toulon.

Romero, M., Lille, B., & Patiño, A. (2017). Usages créatifs du numérique
pour

l’apprentissage au XXIe siècle. PUQ.

Siemens, G. (2013). Learning analytics: The emergence of a discipline.
Amer-

ican Behavioral Scientist, 57 (10), 1380–1400.

Vassilakopoulou, P., & Hustad, E. (2023). Bridging digital divides: A
literature review and research agenda for information systems research.
Information Systems Frontiers, 25 (3), 955–969.

56

M. Durampart et al.

is

licensed under

Open Access This chapter the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if
changes were made.

in any medium or format, as

terms of

the

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.


