Why, What and How to help each Citizen to Understand Artificial
Intelligence? Frédéric Alexandre, Jade Becker, Marie-Hélène Comte,
Aurelie Lagarrigue,

Romain Liblau, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Jade Becker, Marie-Hélène Comte, Aurelie Lagarrigue,
Romain Liblau, et al.. Why, What and How to help each Citizen to
Understand Artificial Intelligence?. KI - Künstliche Intelligenz, 2021,
1-9, pp.1610-1987. ￿10.1007/s13218-021-00725-7￿. ￿hal-03024034v2￿

HAL Id: hal-03024034

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03024034v2

Submitted on 27 Apr 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Why, What and How to help each Citizen to Understand Artificial
Intelligence?

Frédéric Alexandre1, Jade Becker4, Marie-Hélène Comte2, Aurélie
Lagarrigue2, Romain Liblau4, Margarida Romero3, and Thierry Viéville1,3.
1 Inria, Mnemosyne team, https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne 2 Inria,
Learning Lab https://learninglab.inria.fr and Science Outreach
Department, 3 Laboratoire LINE, Université côte d’azur
http://univ-cotedazur.fr/laboratories/line 4 Magic-Makers
https://www.magicmakers.fr mailto: thierry.vieville@inria.fr Cc:
frederic.alexandre@inria.fr jade.becker@magicmakers.fr
marie-helene.comte@inria.fr aurelie.lagarrigue@inria.fr
romain.liblau@magicmakers.fr margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr

Keywords: Artificial intelligence for all, Computational thinking, Open
Educational Resources (OERs), MOOC.

Abstract.

A critical understanding of digital technologies is an empowering
competence for citizens of all ages. In this paper we introduce an open
educational approach of artificial intelligence (AI) for everyone.
Through a hybrid and participative MOOC we aim to develop a critical and
creative perspective about the way AI is integrated in the different
domains of our lives. We have built and now operate a MOOC in AI for all
the citizens from 15 years old. The MOOC aims to help understanding AI
foundations and applications, intended for a large public beyond the
school domain, with more than 20000 participants engaged in the MOOC
after nine months. This study addresses the pedagogical methods for
designing and evaluating the MOOC in AI. Through this study we raise
four questions regarding citizen education in AI: Why (i.e., to which
aim) sharing such citizen formation ? What is the disciplinary knowledge
to be shared? What are the competencies to develop ? How can it be
shared and evaluated? We finally share learning analytics, quantitative
and qualitative evaluations and explain to which extent educational
science research helps enlighten such large scale initiatives. The
analysis of the MOOC in AI helps to identify that the main feedback
related to AI is “fear”, because AI is unknown and mysterious to the
participants. After developing playful AI simulations, the AI mechanisms
become familiar for the MOOC participants and they can overcome their
misconception on AI to develop a more critical point of view. This
contribution describes a K-12 AI educational project or initiatives of a
considerable impact, via the formation of teachers and other educators.

1.  

Introduction

All citizens are impacted by digital technologies derived from computer
science and this takes a new qualitative and quantitative turn with what
is named artificial intelligence (AI). We must allow everyone to
understand how AI mechanisms work in order to develop a critical and
creative perspective towards digital technologies. For this objective,
we develop a participative MOOC aiming to develop computational thinking
competency and machine learning (ML) initiation. The MOOC initiative is
inspired by the Finnish initiative to train 1% of its population on the
AI domain [1], but also on the success in providing previous open access
to computational thinking education resources for teachers and citizens
not familiar with computer science. The AI MOOC we introduce in this
paper is operated as a citizen training in AI in the broad sense,
intended to a large public beyond the school domain, reaching more than
20,000 participants with a satisfaction level higher than 90% [2].
Through this initiative we aim to achieve an ubiquitary citizen
university in digital culture and digital sciences [3].

Why (i.e., to which aim) helping everyone to understand artificial
intelligence ? Most of us simply use it, do we need to understand how it
works ? As discussed in [27] for kid initiation regarding AI, or pointed
out in [23] at a societal level, and when introducing teaching resources
such as [22] the need of “acculturation” is

1

often simply settled as mandatory. This is also true at a more general
level for STEM [26]. We agree, but it is worth making explicit the
reason why. Let us point out two reasons: - With the disruptive behavior
of such AI mechanisms, one tends to personify such machines [9,28] or
even put oneself down as “less intelligent” than the machine [23] : This
could be a lever for domination (by humans) able to manipulate such
systems, as opposed to critical thinking development (the notion is
discussed in, e.g., [11]). Understanding AI can thus be considered as a
mandatory (know-why) social skill. And we are going to observe that the
main issue is related to “fear” : Being unknown and mysterious, AI was
frightening, while thanks to this MOOC, “playing” with AI allows one to
make these mechanisms familiar. - Applications of these technologies
seem endless in potentially all domains, at both an individual and
collective level. We however can obviously consider that one will not be
able to innovate without mastering the “how it works” [23,26] beyond
using it as a black-box, because some key behaviors (e.g.,
adversariality [9]) are counter-intuitive and must be understood to
avoid spurious usage. AI thus yields domain-specific knowledge
(know-what) and technical (know-how) skills, which are mandatory.

1

A step further, while the two previous points intersect with all STEM,
AI raises a specific issue: It questions also our vision of human
intelligence [9] by trying to model some cognitive human processes that
are not restricted to computational thinking [12]. Current models of
human creativity, for instance, can be questioned by AI models [29].
Moreover, when modeling some aspects of algorithmic intelligence, we are
also advancing in a better understanding of human intelligence.

What to share regarding AI popularization is extensively discussed, for
youngsters, e.g., in [27]. It is now well established, e.g., by Druga
[18] that starting to “play” (i.e., experiment with and “program”) with
such a system allows one to develop the know-why, know-what and know-how
skills pointed out previously. Available adult formations are more
technical, as e.g. with Element of AI [1,25] which is now a worldwide
reference in terms of AI popularization, or are simply “talking about”
AI. We however consider that there is a lack: Adults also need to “play”
with AI mechanisms to deconstruct misconceptions and construct pertinent
representations of the underlying mechanisms, as proposed here.

How to share such know-why, know-what, and know-how skills is also
already widely reported (see again [27] for an inventory of existing
resources for youngsters, and [25] for a general positioning of our
proposal with respect to the two other major resources). Here the key
point is that we consider, following [24], a MOOC with game based
learning components, dedicated to citizen formation as developed in [19]
for another subject. Our pedagogical approach is in link with social
learning, and promoting engagement as studied in [16] : Active learning
including unplugged activities (see, e.g., [14]), promoting peer
interactions, proposing “take-away” reusable resources, this with a
clear problem-centric learning objective.

In order to report how we answered these three questions, we are going
first to explain our position sketching what is to be shared with
everyone and then to detail more concretely in link with 21st century
skills what is proposed in this formation, before presenting the method
and results and discussing perspectives.

2.  

Artificial Intelligence and the 21st century skills

As introduced, AI initiation of everyone is a key regarding what is
called 21st century skills as explained in Fig.1 and developed in [12].
With respect to this disruptive technology we need critical thinking to
make the distinction between beliefs and effective tools, computational
thinking skills to understand how it works in order to understand what
happens when using it, problem solving capability to interact with these
objects at the application level, creativity to develop and create our
own usage of AI mechanism (and not only undergo the imposed uses), and
collaboration because all this can not be managed alone.

2

1 People often focus on “does AI yield machine intelligence” which is an
ill-posed question as discussed in our supplementary material, whereas
the fact machines execute what is considered as intelligent calls into
question what is human intelligence. 2
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/21st_century_skills

2

Fig. 1. A schematic representation of 21st century skills, from
https://margaridaromero.me with permission, see supplementary material
Fig.1bis for a detailed description.

Wondering how a machine would learn to solve such a complex task,
comparing natural and artificial intelligence is also a great
opportunity to ask how we, humans, could solve “mechanically” a complex
task, a very interesting way of thinking in a reflective way how a human
brain can solve it systematically. This is in direct link with
computational thinking [12], and this aspect is highlighted in the
proposed formation.

We detail in the supplementary material the learning objectives of the
formation and develop how it is implemented. Let us simply highlight our
specificity: With respect to other offers in the field [1], the content
is less technical (e.g., machine learning programming in Python is
proposed only as an extension), but not only a verbal introduction,
while effective activities, including unplugged activities (i.e.,
without a computer using low-tech everyday tools), are proposed to
understand how-it-works. We not only address AI at the conceptual level
but the learner is engaged in practicing with different programs to
learn the fundamentals of AI. As an example, in Fig.2, we summarize the
level of technical explanation given for an activity using the
http://playground.tensorflow.org interface, where participants are
invited to build and train their own small deep neural network to solve
a categorization task, while other activities with images or sounds are
proposed, learning by doing.

Fig. 2. The level of technical explanation of the “how-it-works”. Left:
An elementary computation (e.g., predicting whether the person head is
feminin or masculin) is implemented via a computation unit (i.e.,
neurons) taking into account several input data X (e.g., the hair
length, face pilosity, mensurations, …), each up to certain weight W
depending on their pertinence or robustness (e.g., pilosity more than
hair length) and combine then before providing an output y, based on
statistical adjustment. Right: Combining many computation units in
layers (i.e. deep-network, when many layers), allows to realize complex
robust computations (e.g., face recognition or categorization) providing
that all information has been “put in numbers” (i.e., quantified), with
results that can be interpreted at a semantic level by humans. Images
re-edited from https://pixees.fr and https://playground.tensorflow.org.

3

This formation has primary targets and secondary targets: The primary
targets are “science outreach mediatory actors” (médiateur·e·s
scientifique, in French), involved in AI K-12 initiation, while many
citizens (e.g., parents of K-12 pupils) used this MOOC in order to
transmit what they learnt.

An important aspect is the fact that all materials are open resources,
in the sense of [17]. Beyond publishing under a CC-BY licence, and
considering the different aspects of Open Educational Resources (OER) as
reviewed in [20], we share our resources at different levels, enriching
the link between OER and MOOC as stated in [21], with three aspects.
Granularization: Embedded in a scenario, our resources are also modular
and have been indexed and re-edited in order to be integratable as
components of other scenarios, thus with suitable documentation to reuse
the proposed bean. Contamination: One lever of the formation is the
“teach to learn” paradigm, i.e., invite the learner to share her or his
new skill in order to consolidate it, thus making the resource bean not
only “open” but also easily reusable at the level reached by a person
finishing the formation. Collaboration: The formation is not only
“asynchronous” but also used in hybrid (online or in real life)
synchronous sessions, raising another challenge: Not only reuse the
resource, forking some resource if needed, including merging to enhance
the resource, but also take the opportunity to have a common use of the
resource to collaborate as in Class´Code [4], in a given (geographical
or online structural) territory.

3.  

Learning by doing through concrete AI related activities

Each of the three chapters of the course is illustrated by concrete
activities that bring learners to train their own machine learning
models and interact with real life applications of AI.

For the first part of what artificial intelligence is, participants
develop a first understanding of AI through training a visual
recognition neural network model. In order to frame the activity, we
designed an integrated tool to control the training of the model. This
experiment is sequenced in three steps. In the first step the learners
create a model that differentiates between two categories of images by
feeding the model images from a dataset of samples given to them. This
first step helps dispel preconceived ideas we have noticed in children
with whom we did this activity such as the idea of an AI is a robot that
can recognize anything in an image. They are led to realize that the AI
they have trained can not recognize categories it was not trained on by
testing it on images that do not represent one of the two categories
known to the AI. In the second step the children understand that with
few examples the machine learning model struggles to generalize the
concepts represented by the images by testing it on images that match
one of the categories but in a different context or position (a drawing
of a lion instead of a photo of a lion for example). The last step is
making them train a model on their own dataset with the classes and
examples they choose and find.

The second activity around how AI is developed aims to highlight the
central role of data in the making of machine learning applications
through experimenting with biases in datasets. We have created a dataset
of images with two categories: women and men with an obvious bias (women
have long hair and men have short hair). After training a first model
with this dataset and seeing it fail, the participants are then invited
to reflect on the wrong inferences and create their own dataset to train
a better model. They select data, train their model, test and iterate
until they’re satisfied with the result. Then, to emphasize the
importance of data, participants are invited to build datasets to train
machine learning models to recognize subjective categories, for example
“cute cat vs ugly cat” and thereby understand the responsibility that
fall on the humans creating AI’s and the importance of questioning the
data behind the AI applications they might encounter.

The last part about the interactions between AI and humans is
illustrated by a series of activities where children experiment with
real life AI applications. They are first exposed to painting generated
by a Generative Adversarial Networks model and the painting made by a
human painter the model was trained on. They are asked to try to
differentiate the human paintings from the AI generated paintings. Then
they get to modify the YOLO (You Only Look Once) model using a camera
based real time image recognition model. They finally interact with a
chatbot. These activities aim to broaden their understanding of the
applications of machine learning and question how they can help humans.

4

4.

Method and Production

Contents allow us to gain a first understanding of what AI means and
what it is not, understand the principles of machine learning and the
crucial role played by data, taking into account the societal issues of
AI. Learners are invited to question themself, beyond preconceived
ideas, and really understand the ground of AI; perform activities and
manipulate AI programs to build their own vision; acquire a minimal
scientific and technical culture (concepts, history of humans and
ideas). As an outcome they are able to discuss the subject, question
applications, choose some framework to contribute to the development (or
not) of AI applications: - Questioning: Deciphering the discourse around
AI to move from preconceived ideas to questions on which to rely to
understand. - Experimenting: Perform activities and manipulate AI
programs to make up our own mind, with both online and unplugged
activities [11]. - Discovering: share a minimal culture, scientific and
technical, to become familiar with concepts through the history of
humans and their ideas. - Appropriating: being able to discuss the
subject, its applications, its framework with various interlocutors to
contribute to the construction of AI applications.

We produced a hybrid, participative, performative and contaminating
training: - Freely accessible online training course with free of charge
attestation of attendance; online exchange forum, to share and help each
other, when training on these subjects; online and in real life hangouts
to extend this sharing and serve local projects on these subjects, all
content items being also reusable to derive and build other resources. -
Hybrid : Because online resources are designed to derive in situ
activities. As a consequence, there are no “time limited sessions” but
people join when they want and return when they need. - Participative :
In the sense that not only “scientists and engineers” with professional
video and content producers have co-created the resources, but also
“end-users” such as teachers or parents, while the content is adapted
considering the participant feedbacks, including new resources creation
(a kind of “wiki” where participants provide their input via forum
messages and we take care of the shaping). - Performative : Because
students are taught to be their own teacher, while helping each other,
and we also consider “how to learn to learn” mechanisms (e.g., find some
answers on the web, discover some elements by themself during problem
solving activities). - Contaminating : Because students are invited to
“pay” for this course by … sharing the contents with people from their
surrounding.

Nothing “new” here, just the fact we not only propose a xMOOC “course”
but also dedicate enough time resources to discuss with the
participants, beg external person to contribute when needed, and do not
restrain our participation to “our” MOOC but are willing to export also
some resources or dialog into other initiatives of the same kind (e.g.,
driven by https://www.reseau-canope.fr or other https://classcode.fr
partners), i.e., not only “with us” but also “at the others”, using an
approach known as cMooc [16].

This formation is hybrid and each chapter is illustrated by activities
that bring learners to train their own machine learning models and
interact with real life applications of AI, as detailed in the previous
section. The formation is also performative and contaminating in the
sense that an adult benefits from this training and then in his-her
family or in his-her business, association, structure shares what s-he
has discovered with his or her children or the seniors, or the other way
round. Part of the training exercises is to be able to transmit what has
been learned. Which is also a good way to learn. In Fig.3, we show such
an activity that can be redone with family or friends.

5

Fig. 3. Left: The “Nim game” is a simple strategy game in which two
players (here a human and the “machine”) take turns removing (or
“nimming”) 1, 2 or 3 objects (here rods), the loser making the last
nimming. This setup allows us to understand what an algorithm is
(including algorithmic recursivity). Right: This “AI” machine is made of
“balls and bowls” (or any equivalent objects). Each box corresponds to
the number of remaining rods. The machine is “trained” by just putting a
red or blue ball, depending on the game issue (win or lose), in the bowl
corresponding to each move. After training, the whole game policy is
stored in the “machine” and the artificial player just has to choose
what to play, counting the balls in the corresponding bowl. This allows
us to understand what is called “reinforcement learning”, and why a
mechanism can “learn” a non-trivial rule (in fact, “always leaving a
multiple of 4 rods”), without understanding anything. Images from
https://pixees.fr as open CC-BY resources.

Regarding unplugged activities, it is often said that we should limit
screen time, avoid digital passivity, and develop critical thinking
about the digital world. A paradigm exists in which neither hardware nor
software are required: unplugged computing (see [11] which has an
English version as supplementary material for details). During unplugged
or computerless activities , we learn concepts, often by playful
activities to develop computational thinking competence [12] as a way of
solving problems, in which computers are not the end in themselves.
Unplugged computing activities have the advantage of not requiring
costly equipment or the skills to operate it, relieving the cognitive
cost to invest to make them work, allowing us to concentrate on the
content. It is also the best proposal for so-called “contaminating”
activities. In artificial intelligence initiation, it has also the major
advantage to demystify and unpersonify the machine.

3

Concretely the resources (as exemplified in Fig.4) are made of short
videos freely reusable, synthetical texts, quiz to auto-evaluate what
has been shared and also to find by yourself some elements, activities
online to manipulate machine learning algorithms via graphical
interfaces, and unplugged activities to be performed in the family, with
friends or in educational contexts (as exemplified in Fig.3); such
activities are designed to be also realized by youngers (typically K6 -
K12). At last, a mind-map, peer-to-peer corrected, is proposed in order
to summarize what has been learnt via such a key-word graphical
representation. A step further, the forum is an important tool: quiz
questions are discussed (some of them have been improved after the first
answers), and notions are re-explained or re-formulated, up to the point
of enriching the core resources with re-writing of shared information:
the goal for this citizen formation is to be improved by citizens.

Fig. 4. Two examples of open reusable resources. Left: One thumbnail of
the videos, based on a 3 to 4 minutes dialog between Guillaume, who is
the “citizen”, and a researcher. She answers the question, gives some
explanations, and invites him and us to question, experiment, discover
and discuss each topic. Right: An example of the first screen of an
interactive animation, guiding step by step to the discovery of a
content, and some manipulation. The key point is that these resources
are modular in order to be reused in other courses developed by the
teachers (in the wide sense) using this resource for their formation.
Images from https://classcode.fr/iai as open CC-BY resources.

3 During unplug activities, the learners can take a step back, embodying
[13] their learning through activities involving movement. It aims to
develop a socio-critical approach through which the learner and citizen
develops a critical and creative relationship with digital technology,
appropriating the concepts and processes of computational thinking with
their entire mind and body. The positive impact of these activities was
studied, for instance by Brackmann and his colleagues [14] on two
classes with a control group; they observed a statistically significant
improvement in the children’s performance in computational thinking, for
example, breaking down problems into sub-problems.

6

5.

First Results and Analysis

After three months of activity, more than 13000 persons have been
engaged in the AI MOOC (37% female, 62% male, 1% not binary) with more
than 1600 persons active (answering to the first quiz) and about 600
persons having completed the full MOOC. Even if the MOOC massively
reaches a French public (79%), the African public is also well
represented (Morocco : 4% ; Senegal, Tunisia, Cameroon, Ivory Coast :
1%). In all, 51 countries are represented. Participants are mainly
active (52% on activity, 14% retired, 12% students, 8% job researcher),
mostly at university level (62% at least master degree in any field, 10%
PhD), but rather beginners in the field (59% full beginners, 38%
intermediate non expert). Working time is 10 to 20 hours on average
(about 50% of the people spend from 2 up to 5 hours per week, during
about 3 weeks, while 25% spend less and 25% more), and above 94% of
people having their expectation satisfied (43% fully satisfied), and 82%
of them state that they could recommend this MOOC.

These statistics come from a start-of-course (1140 respondents) and
end-of-course (217 respondents) surveys completed anonymously by
participants on a voluntary basis. We should note that there is a bias
in this survey since it is expected that it is people who are really
invested in MOOC, and probably - as a result - the people with the best
track record, who responded. This survey was presented as a tool to
listen to participants’ opinions, allowing us to know them better and
improve training over time.

On the forum, more than 500 persons have been or are active while more
than 3100 are reading, and there are about 370 discussions, more than
half being on the course contents (e.g., strong versus weak AI, symbolic
versus numeric methods, societal issues, …). More than 10 online
hangouts of 30 to 200 persons have been organized already by one of the
70 partners of the Class´Code project [4], during this covid-19
confinement. Several pieces of this resource start to be reused to build
other resources, e.g., to enrich textbooks and their digital
supplementary material.

4

Detailed evaluation results are given in the supplementary material of
this paper, leading to following analysis.

Qualitatively, beyond very nice and encouraging positive feedbacks,
through the constant evaluation of the course by the users, we are
invited to take several improvements into account: (i) extend the
existing formation with more operational tutorials, (ii) manage some
technical weakness because we integrate state of the art recent external
resources, some still to be consolidated, (iii) complete the existing
contents to better help the learner progression. And we will, since this
is a long term open course (probably more than 2 years). We have also a
several questions on application domains of AI (i.e., in education,
regarding democracy governance, or disabled assisting tools), which are
a bit beyond what we can offer in reasonable time, because each third
party domain requires a lot of prerequisites before considering AI
related tools. Our idea is to offer “plugins” to other courses, i.e.,
participate regarding AI issues, the first project already in
preparation being on GreenIT. For all these considered extensions, the
present course acts as the core curriculum.

Qualitative observations, reading the different participant feedbacks
available in our open data set, confirms our hypothesis that citizens
now have a better understanding of AI. As pointed out, the main feedback
is related to “fear” : Being unknown and mysterious, AI was frightening,
while “playing” with AI allows one to make these mechanisms familiar. At
the end, apprehensiveness is still present but regarding the human use
of AI, not about “the” AI itself. Another shift concerns technophoby
versus technophily. At the end, we did not notice than people “changed
their mind” but all of then were more “technocritic”, i.e., considering
that the true answer is in the middle. A step further, several feedbacks
concerned the fact “it does not always work”: We have several pertinent
observations from people noticing how easy it could be to defeat the
estimation, not because the algorithm was “wrong” but because the
performances were limited,

4 For instance, one of us is also co-author of a “science” textbook for
French K11 and K12, the AI initiation being included in the curriculum
of this school teaching.

7

and easily biased by the training data. Regarding soft-skills we have
no counter-example at the end of the course of people still
“personifying” AI mechanisms, but these persons may have left the course
if too far from their a-priori convictions. We are not able to really
evaluate to which extent the know-why skills really improved, but can
easily report participants to have generally the feeling they did.
Regarding know-what skills, asserted by quiz answers, we have pretty
good results, it is clear that this part of the formation has been
successful, with one reservation: Our participants were mainly
relatively well educated persons, as detailed in the appendix, thus were
expected to succeed, regarding knowledge acquisition or consolidation.
We also have no precise evaluation of what has been “discovered” (versus
already partially known or well known) but can feedback about several
persons “surprised” by a part of what they found. Regarding the know-how
skills, the situation is contrasted and depends whether or not people
did have time to invest in the activities. If yes, results are really
good and participants came back with a request to “go further on”. This
is in favor of our assumption that this formation may be a gate towards
more technical initiation such as [1,25]. All together, we can only
affirm that self-evaluation and peer to peer evaluations lead to good
results, and to witness that participants have the strong feeling to
have a better understanding of AI.

A few participants did not find what they expected, either because they
are not interested in redoing activities with young people (of any age
;)) to better understand or because they were looking for professional
formation. In fact, we mainly reached rather highly educated persons,
while we target popularisation, which seems to be more the case now, but
slowly. In both cases, when a person joins, the content is always
considered as accessible, and useful (“good to know”). The hard point is
thus convincing yourself to join. We hope that in real life hangouts and
also community approaches will help, and work on this aspect [5,6].

On our side, we are really delighted to participate on these
researcher-citizen exchanges and shares, with very interesting
questions, sometimes on crucial subjects, always kind and moderated (no
troll , yet ;)).

5

We also better understand the real educational needs regarding AI
foundation and applications. People clearly first want to clarify their
belief about such a topic, understand what is true, what is coming and
what is putative only. They then want to link such knowledge with
concrete applications, e.g., what can be done regarding visual or audio
processing, or not. This was easily covered for generic applicative
tools, this is less easy to address for specific domain applications
(e.g., justice or medicine) because this strongly depends on many other
specific aspects of how it can be used. They finally are generally
surprised but then highly convinced that they must “play with it” to
build their own correct representations, and are rather proud to
succeed.

With respect to other studies on MOOC engagement the present success
seems to be related, as expected, to the “important role that
instructors, course resources and pedagogic practices that focus on
providing problem-centric and active learning play in engaging online
students” [16] yielding good behavioral, cognitive and affective
engagement, even if the didactic objective is specific but rather wide
(here “understanding AI” with respect to, e.g., learning a given
programming language), while peer interactions were really poor. Further
studying this engagement, as performed in, e.g., [16] is a perspective
of the present work.

6.  

Conclusion and Perspectives

We have reported on a citizen AI formation, detailing the pedagogical
choices (linking everyday life elements to fundamental concepts,
understanding the “how it works” via online or unplugged concrete
activities, making explicit how understanding the “science underneath”
allows to better discuss the societal

5 We only got a bitter exchange about the fact we are very strong on
gender equality, e.g., using inclusive writing (i.e., expliciting both
male and female genders in French writing). Gender equality issues are
especially important in the present context, and are omnipresent in our
resources. This has been considered as “too much” by one participant,
while several did support our choice.

8

impacts) and the pedagogical method.(e.g.: small conceptual videos,
contaminating activities to be redone in real life, …).

We may consider our offer as the “grown up” counterpart of what is
usually proposed to kids [18,22,27], i.e., a more accessible gate for
non technophile targets, as an intermediate step before courses allowing
the use of AI at work, such as [1,25], and as an alternative for more
superficial presentation of AI only in “words”. It seems to cover a real
need, as quantified in section 6, and our goal is to really multiply the
audience, either within the MOOC itself or by contributing to other
initiatives, thanks to the openness of our resources.

Regarding AI-K12 education, our experience (including for other
connected formations of Class´Code, such as [2] reviewed in [3]) is that
such a MOOC is not directly usable as it. It has however three usages:
(i) it allows the formation of the teachers in the wide sense (including
parents, through family activities). (ii) it provides also reusable
resources for these learners to prepare activities. (iii) several
modular beans of resources (videos, interactive animations,
self-contained texts) of the MOOC can be exploited by K8-K12 persons in
an autonomous way. Building a “MOOC for youth” is another challenge,
probably to be designed on the basis of game based learning MOOCs as
studied by one of the co-author [24]. Examples (unpublished yet) of
escape games involving STEM and including AI aspects, that seem to work
well have been reported to us. It is a perspective of our work [30]. The
need for the educators to gain a scientific and technical culture before
deploying learning activities, was the first priority.

This “popular education” initiative is a contribution to the idea of a
“ubiquitary citizen university in digital science and culture” [3],
i.e., the fact that, beyond schooling, our society has a real need of
“formation throughout life”. And this is something that must be
participative, performative and contaminant, in the sense developed in
section 5, contributing to everyone’s 21st century education in the
sense reviewed in section 3, regarding AI competencies and beyond.

As next steps, we are going to invite a MSc student to deeply analyze
the available learning analytics in order to better understand how to
pursue (for at least two years) this initiative. We also are going,
within the https://www.cai.community project, to further work on the
online community aspects, targeting teachers (we must make a choice in
terms of community), and this will drive us toward not only considering
teaching AI, but also teaching the way to teach AI, including using AI
frameworks (both symbolic and numeric) to better model the human
learning process.

And for those who still believe that AI will generate a dystopia or some
utopia, we will carry on explaining that this is neither wrong nor true,
but a belief (anyone is free to have his or her own belief), and the
best way to clarify, see go further, such belief, is to understand
intelligently artificial intelligence.

Acknowledgements The Digital Direction for Education of the French
Ministry, the French Digital University Engineering and Technology,
Microsoft, EducAzur, for funding 4 minutes 34, S24B l’interactive,
Magic-Makers, DataBingo, La Ligue de l’enseignement, Université de
Nantes, La Compagnie du Code, for contributions and all Class´Code
partners.

Declarations

Funding: The https://classcode.fr/iai formation has been co-funded the
Learning Lab Inria, the Digital Direction for Education of the French
Ministry (name “DNE”), the French Digital University Engineering and
Technology (name “UNIT”) and EducAzur, one resource has been co-funded
by Microsoft-Education.

Conflictual or competing interests: Not applicable for the
non-commercial “common good” reported here: This free access ressources
set is also not, up to our best knowledge, in concurrence with any other
equivalent commercial product.

Availability of data, material and code availability: All resources are
available under CC-BY or CC-BY-NC-SA

licences and the platform software is open-source under the CeCILL-C (a
French declinaison of the GNU-GPL).

9

References

1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
7.  
8.  
9.  
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 

A free online introduction to artificial intelligence for non-experts,
https://www.elementsofai.com, last accessed 2020/05/31

Mariais, C., Roche, D., Farhi, L., Barnabé, S., Cruchon, S., de
Quatrebarbes, S., Viéville, T. EIAH’19 Wokshop : Apprentissage de la
pensée informatique de la maternelle à l’Université : retours
d’expériences et passage à l’échelle, Paris, France (2019)
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02145466v2 Atlan, C., Archambault, J.P., Banus,
O., Bardeau, F., Blandeau, A. et al.. Apprentissage de la pensée
informatique : de la formation des enseignant·e·s à la formation de
tou·te·s les citoyen·ne·s. EIAH’19 Wokshop - Apprentissage de la pensée
informatique de la maternelle à l’Université : retours d’expériences et
passage à l’échelle, Paris, France (2019)
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02145480v1 The Class´Code https://classcode.fr
online reusable formation https://classcode.fr/iai, last accessed
2020/05/31 Corieri, P., Romero, M., Massart, T., Goletti, O., Mens, K.,
et al.. Enjeux dans la création d’une communauté d’enseignants engagés
dans l’apprentissage de l’informatique. Didapro 8 - DidaSTIC - Colloques
francophones de didactique de l’informatique, Lille, France (2020)
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02426274v1 Romero, M., Lefèvre, S.-C.,
Viéville, T. When a Master of Sciences on EdTech becomes an
International Community. ERCIM News, (2020)
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02418510v1 Searle,J.-R, Minds, Brains and
programs, The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 3, Cambridge
University Press, (1980). Wolpert, D.H., Macready, W.G., “No Free Lunch
Theorems for Optimization”, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation 1, 67. (1997) Ganascia, J.G. Le mythe de la Singularité :
faut-il craindre l’intelligence artificielle ? Éditions du Seuil,
Collection Sciences Ouvertes, (2017) Rougier N. Demystify artificial
intelligence: Challenges and history of artificial intelligence,
Class´Code popularization video and text (2018)
https://pixees.fr/demystify-artificial-intelligence Romero, M.,
Duflot-Kremer, M.,, Viéville T.. Le jeu du robot : analyse d’une
activité d’informatique débranchée sous la perspective de la cognition
incarnée. Review of science, mathematics and ICT education, Laboratory
of Didactics of Sciences, Mathematics and ICT, Department of Educational
Sciences and Early Childhood Education - University of Patras. Wing, J.
M. Computational thinking. IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and
Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC), 33. IEEE. (2011). Tsarava, K.,
Moeller, K., Pinkwart, N., Butz, M., Trautwein, U., & Ninaus, M.
Training Computational Thinking: Game-Based Unplugged and Plugged-in
Activities in Primary School. European Conference on Games Based
Learning, 687–695. (2017). Brackmann, C. P., Román-González, M., Robles,
G., Moreno-León, J., Casali, A., & Barone, D. Development of
computational thinking skills through unplugged activities in primary
school. Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Primary and Secondary
Computing Education, 65–72. ACM. (2017). Romero, M. Les compétences pour
le XXIe siècle. Usages créatifs du numérique pour l’apprentissage au
XXIe siècle, 15-28, Chap2. (2017) Hew, K. F. Promoting engagement in
online courses: What strategies can we learn from three highly rated
MOOCS. British Journal of Educational Technology, 47(2), 320-341. (2016)
Baker, Fredrick W. (2017). “An Alternative Approach: Openness in
Education Over the Last 100 Years.” TechTrends 61 (2): 130–40.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-016-0095-7. Druga, Stefania. (2018).
“Growing up with AI : Cognimates : From Coding to Teaching Machines.”
Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/120691. Hudson, Lorraine, Gerd
Kortuem, Annika Wolff, and Patrina Law. (2016). “Smart Cities MOOC:
Teaching Citizens How to Co-Create Smart Cities.” In . Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. http://oro.open.ac.uk/46951/. Iii, Fredrick W. Baker, and
Dan Surry. (2013). “Open Education Designs: A Taxonomy for
Differentiating and Classifying Open Learning Environments.” In ,
189–94. Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education
(AACE). https://www.learntechlib.org/primary/p/48090/. Jemni, Mohamed,
Kinshuk, and Mohamed Koutheair Khribi, eds. (2017). Open Education: From
OERs to MOOCs. Lecture Notes in Educational Technology. Berlin
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-52925-6.
“Machine Learning for Kids.” n.d. Accessed January 12, (2021).
https://machinelearningforkids.co.uk . Minichiello, Federica. (2019).
“L’acculturation à l’intelligence artificielle : l’urgence d’une prise
de conscience.” Revue internationale d’éducation de Sèvres, no. 81
(September): 12–15. https://doi.org/10.4000/ries.8538. Romero,
Margarida. (2013). “Game Based Learning MOOC. Promoting Entrepreneurship
Education.” Elearning Papers, Special Edition MOOCs and Beyond 33
(January): 1–5. Roos, Temuu, and Victor Storchan. (2020). “Formation à
l’IA – Épisode 1 : Elements Of AI,” January.
https://www.lemonde.fr/blog/binaire/2021/01/12/formation-a-lia-episode-1-elements-of-ai/.
Suwahyo, Bayu Widyaswara. (2020). “Problems of Computational Thinking,
Teaching, and Learning in a STEM Framework: A Literature Review.” In ,
180–85. Atlantis Press. https://doi.org/10.2991/assehr.k.201214.233.
Touretzky, David, Christina Gardner-McCune, Fred Martin, and Deborah
Seehorn. (2019). “Envisioning AI for K-12: What Should Every Child Know
about AI?” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
33 (01): 9795–99. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33019795.
Lopatovska, Irene, and Harriet Williams. (2018). “Personification of the
Amazon Alexa: BFF or a Mindless Companion.” In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Human Information Interaction & Retrieval, 265–68. CHIIR
’18. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3176349.3176868. Abiteboul, Serge, and Gilles
Dowek. (2017). Le temps des algorithmes. Humensis. Barnabé, Sabrina,
Lola Denet, Mathieu Manrique, Divya Menon, Éric Pascual, Margarida
Romero, and Thierry Viéville. (2020). “A Low-Cost Tabletop Set-up to
Collect Learning Analytics during Computational Thinking Unplugged or
Tangible Activities.” Inria.

10

7.

Supplementary material: Detailed presentation of 21st century skills.

Fig. 1. A detailed representation of 21st century skills, from
https://margaridaromero.me with permission.

11

8.

Supplementary material: Understanding intelligently Artificial
Intelligence.

6

Artificial Intelligence is “the science of making machines do things
that would require intelligence if done by [human]” (Marvin Minsky
1968). This definition is very interesting because it does not address
the issue of whether a machine is “intelligent” or not, which is an
ill-posed question [7], but defines a mechanical process with respect to
(what we consider as) human intelligence. On the contrary, the emergence
of AI mechanisms question what we consider as intelligent, for a human
intelligence. Do large mental arithmetic skills demonstrate human
intelligence ? A century ago, the answer was crealy yes, to the point of
proposing public performances, while pupils were heavily trained, and
mental calculators were in great demand in research centers. Nowadays
pocket or smartphone calculators make the job and we know it is mainly
the mechanical application of algorithms. The fact is that not only
numerical calculations have been mechanized, but complex symbolic
operations manipulating symbols and relation between symbols (so called,
“symbolic” AI) and also complex numerical processes (so called,
“numeric” AI) yielding mechanisms to transform speech to text,
categorize and or locate objects in pictures, and so on, up to
implementing high-level specific cognitive functions algorithmically.

7

What is to be learned ?

Three key-points have to be made explicit :

-   Firstly, very efficient transformation mechanisms (e.g., speech to
    text read out ) can be realized without “understanding a word” of
    what is said, being able to process information does not mean that
    information makes sense.

8

-   Secondly, implemented methods, especially in symbolic algorithms
    (e.g., symbolic calculation ), can be in total disruption with
    respect to the corresponding human mental processes.

9

-   Thirdly, it is generally accepted that the more specific the task is
    to solve, the most efficient the algorithm 10 will be, “general”
    problem solver cannot in theory be performant [8].

We consider that sharing such epistemological ideas is crucial to help
everyone build an unbiased vision of what is called AI.

6 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligence 7 Including non-intuitive
sophisticated ones such as
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trachtenberg_system

8 Regarding speech-to-text, it appears that our speech decomposes in a
few units of sound that distinguish one word from another in a
particular language (phonem), about 50 (11 to 141 depending on the
language). They form words (we use about 1000 to 3000 words daily, among
10000 to a bit more that 50000). In other is not that huge, and the fact
that speech-to-text systems now work pretty well, words, the
combinatorial detecting phonemes and using powerful and complicated
statistical modeling systems, mainly demonstrates that “read out” does
not require to “understand” the speech. Interesting enough, and contrary
to image recognition, the speech-to-text systems architecture does not
borrow much from our understanding of the corresponding
neurophysiological processes. Furthermore, “brute force” statistical
calculations surpass sophisticated signal processing approaches.

9 A lot of mathematical algebra is now performed using algorithms of
“computer algebra”, so that mathematical engineers delegate most of the
calculation to the machine, concentrating on reasoning and is that the
computer algebra mechanism can be very far from the human concepting.
The key point treatment of the same problem (e.g., polynomial
factorization is performed over finite fields of increasing cardinality
and not using rewriting rules as a human would do). Furthermore, this
requires completely different skills, such as understanding symbolic
algebra, reformulating the problem in an algorithmic way, interpreting
the result or non result. A step ahead, the disruption is even greater
with theorem prover and program formal validators.

10 The contribution of the so-called “no free lunch” theorems is that it
tells us choosing an appropriate algorithm requires making assumptions
about the kinds of target functions the algorithm is being used for
(introduce as much a-priori information as possible), whereas with no
assumptions, no “meta-algorithm”, such as the scientific method,
performs better than random choice.

12

In order to develop a critical and creative agency towards the way AI
is changing our society and everyday life, these new tools that deeply
change our society and everyday life, it is also important to understand
“how it works”. We now learn creative programming at school, and this is
the lever for understanding the digital world. Based on this scientific
culture it is easy to explain the difference with AI mechanisms:

Regarding numerical AI, the system is “programmed by the data”. Very
general algorithms with a lot of parameters can implement very specific
but different functions by adjusting these parameters on a training data
set (either explicitly when supervising the training, or more implicitly
when either providing a positive or negative reinforcement reward or
adjusting the parameters on the data set structure without supervision).
Programming paradigm consists of designing an architecture with suitable
algorithmic modules, setting up a learning process and feeding it up
with data. This is the case for numerical data or symbolic knowledge.
This explanation illustrates the technical level chosen to explain AI
mechanisms to everyone.

A step further, believing that a machine can be built to be (or to
become by itself) “globally intelligent” is neither wrong nor true: It
is a belief [9], and we are all of us free to believe (or not) this
could or will happen. Furthermore, when considering this notion of
intelligence, the concept is often mixed with the notion of
intentionality or self-awareness . This belief is a recurrent human myth
, but also a scientific assumption of “global AI feasibility”, that has
driven years of research, without concrete achievement on the main
subject itself, but very fruitful side effects [10]. Understanding AI is
also a way to develop critical thinking in relation to the field of AI,
as discussed in the next section.

12

13

14

11

Implementing these learning objectives.

At a more concrete level the formation curriculum has been organized in
three sections.

-   What is artificial intelligence? In order to gain a first
    understanding of what AI means and what it is not, including
    historical aspects. One pedagogical key point here is to insert
    between human intelligence and machine intelligence, animal
    intelligence, i.e., compare natural and artificial intelligence.
    Such an approach is not the most frequent, but really helps to think
    differently about AI. A real place to symbolic AI (e.g.,
    formalization of knowledge, e.g., for the semantic Web) is also
    given, not only because it is an important domain, regarding the
    applications, but also because it helps to better understand how we
    humans can formalize our knowledge. The reasons why we can be
    frightened (or unboundly optimistic) by AI is also discussed.

-   How to develop artificial intelligence? Here, machine learning and
    data programming is introduced, without mathematics, but detailed
    enough in order to understand the principles of machine learning and
    the crucial role played by mastering data sets. Care is taken to
    explain all the abscons words (e.g., “deep learning” ? simply the
    fact a large number of calculation layers is pipe-lined from the
    input at the bottom to the output on the top (thus yielding a deep
    architecture) is used to obtain a compact calculation). As detailed
    in the next section, all notions are discovered “by doing” through
    activities. A large part of the section is devoted to data, their
    uses, the related risks (e.g., privacy, bias) always explaining how
    it works, to allow each of us to construct her or his own vision and
    opinion.

-   Artificial intelligence at our service? Beyond the scientific and
    technical aspects, this section aims at better understanding the
    issues and the levers, in order AI to really be at the service of
    people. Beyond

11 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intentionality 12
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consciousness and
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qualia

13 In a nutshell, the notion of “human machine”, that slavish works for
us (untill uprising), starts with slavery where humans are reduced to
machines, and many ancient mythologies, and most modern religions
include artificial people (e.g. golems, Pinocchio or the Frankenstein’
creature), while automata already exists in ancient civilizations before
nowaday modern “robots” (from “robota”, i.e., forced laborer).

14 To be entirely exact, the correct falsifiable scientific assumption
is “global AI cannot exist” and the research objective is to refute this
assumption. What is called “AI winters” [10] is not simply a defeat of
the “global AI” dream, but an “epistemological break” in the Gaston
Bachelard sense, allowing the emergence of actual powerful scientific
productions.

13

myths and rhetoric manipulation . Attention is paid to make the
distinction between what is already there (even if we do not notice it),
what is coming, and what is hypothetical. The better understanding
offered by the two previous sections makes really sense here. Some
applications are detailed, some others are to be … invented. The
question is also raised about when we do not need AI.

15

15 Let us illustrates these two aspects by a saying “if a AI robot with
AI beats you, be sure that, “hidden” behind, a human takes advantage” as
explained in [9], GAFAMs are act as “pyromaniac firefighters”, who
launch great debates on very hypothetical aspects of artificial
intelligence while they impose, from now on, disruptive algorithms of
artificial intelligence, without any discussion. Another aspect is some
“rhetorical shift”: For instance, we discussed a lot of autonomous
vehicles (which obviously will not work after a great craze due to
hazardous media ads), and while we waste time discussing “the dangers or
benefits of autonomous vehicles” we miss asking the real question “do we
need autonomous vehicles or are there other transportation
emergencies?”.

The autonomous vehicle already exists: to avoid any risk it is run on
specific tracks, to facilitate driving we put guide rails, to save
energy we make collective vehicles, they can even drive automatically,
it carries a name: it’s called a train.

14

9.

Supplementary material: details on the evaluation result

10. 

Fig. 1. Participant Profile. A. Gender ; B. Age ; C. School Level ; D.
Current Occupation ; E. Geographic pattern. Statistics come from a
start-of-course (1140 respondents) survey completed anonymously by
participants on a voluntary basis.

15

Fig. 2. Interest for the MOOC and AI. A. Interest in the MOOC ; B.
Knowledge on AI. Statistics come from a start-of-course (1140
respondents) survey completed anonymously by participants on a voluntary
basis.

16

Fig. 3. Participant Satisfaction. A. Global ; B. For each content type.
Statistics come from an end-of-course (217 respondents) survey completed
anonymously by participants on a voluntary basis.

17


