An Ontology to Formalize a Creative Problem Solving
Activity
Chloé Mercier

To cite this version:

Chloé Mercier. An Ontology to Formalize a Creative Problem Solving Activity. IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, 2022, pp.1-1. ￿10.1109/tcds.2022.3210234￿. ￿hal-03791482￿

HAL Id: hal-03791482

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03791482

Submitted on 29 Sep 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

1

An Ontology to Formalize a Creative Problem
Solving Activity

Chlo´e Mercier

Abstract—Our study is set in an educational context: to better
teach and assess twenty-first century skills, such as computational
thinking or creative problem solving, we propose to formalize a
specific activity that involves these competencies. This activity,
referred to as #CreaCube, is presented as an open-ended problem
which consists of assembling a set of robotic cubes into an
autonomous vehicle. We not only anchor our formalization in
classical learning science frameworks but we also propose to draw
on neuro-cognitive models to describe the observed behaviors
of learners engaged in this activity. The chosen formalism is
symbolic and is aligned on upper ontologies to ensure that the vo-
cabulary is well specified. This allows for a better communication
between the summoned research fields, namely learning science,
cognitive neuroscience and computational modeling. Beyond this
specification purpose, we suggest performing inferences using
available reasoners to better guide the analysis of the observables
collected during the experiments. This operationalization of
a creative problem-solving activity is part of an exploratory
research action. In addition, an effective proof of concept is
described in this study.

Index Terms—Cognitive Neuroscience, Ontology, Problem-

Solving, Learning Science, Computational Thinking

I. INTRODUCTION

We propose to formalize creative problem solving using
symbolic knowledge representation to set up the basis of
learner modeling in the precise context of a specific activity,
by representing shareable and reusable knowledge across
three domains: learning science, cognitive neuroscience and
computational modeling. The task that is reviewed here is
presented as an open-ended problem that aims to initiate the
participants to computational thinking and invites them to
solve a problem appealing to creativity using tangible artifacts.
Let us first review the context and research objectives, to define
the competencies we aim to better understand and justify the
choice of the activity before highlighting the related challenges
of such a formalization.

Educational Context: Transversal competencies, which
are sometimes referred to as “twenty-first century skills”,
include (but are not limited to) creativity, problem solving and
computational thinking [1]. Integrating these skills in the K-12
curricula is a key challenge in today’s learning science field
[1], [2]. We postulate that teaching and assessing transversal
competencies could benefit from a better understanding of
the learners’ behaviors in specific activities that require these
competencies. These skills are intrinsically related to each
other, which leads to interdependent definitions. In our context,
creativity refers to the process of producing something new
and adequate with regard to the task being performed (e.g.,
a problem being solved) [3]–[5]. Problem solving has been

Chlo´e Mercier is with Mnemosyne, Inria, Bordeaux, France.

formalized at a computational level [6] and defined as finding a
path from an initial state (the current situation) to a final state
(the goal), while taking into account some constraints (e.g.,
task requirements). However, problem solving in everyday life
takes many different forms, depending on the task and context.
Realistic problems are most often ill-defined, as we will further
clarify in this study. Computational
thinking uses tools
inspired by the field of computer science (e.g., algorithms,
information coding and data representation) to (for example)
solve problems or design systems [7] (see also [8] for a recent
review). By extension, computational thinking also includes
technology literacy. Furthermore, techno-creative activities [9]
have the potential to develop computational thinking, while
they should also engage learners in critical thinking [2]. We
have chosen to focus on an activity involving robotic artifacts,
as developed in the sequel.

These transversal competencies also need to be considered
in relation to (meta-)cognitive processes. The awareness of
one’s own thought processes during learning is key not only
to solve ill-defined problems but also to be able to transfer
skills from a given problem-solving task to another [10]. Here,
we hypothesize that better formalizing and understanding the
learner upstream to meta-learning may contribute to better
pedagogical resource design and help teach this critical aware-
ness of one’s own learning process.

Ill-defined Problem Solving: Research on problem solv-
ing has focused on a diversity of tasks but most of all
on well-defined problems, such as the chess game or the
Tower of Hanoi, which allows us to define task models and
problem-solving methods. In short, the research objective in
problem solving is to represent the problem space, including
the positions of the initial state and of the desired goal
(possibly a region of the space if the goal is not defined
by a unique position but specified through instructions), and
to define a path between the positions. This can be done in
both forward and backward directions, where knowledge can
provide rules for navigating the space while taking constraints
into account, and requires exploration within this space when
considering open problems, as already stated in the pioneering
work of [6]. This also can be solved at a numerical level which
is biologically more plausible (see, e.g., [11]). Nonetheless,
problem solving in everyday life is typically ill-defined in
the sense that the goal is only partially defined or may have
to be changed throughout the resolution, the initial state is
only partially observable, and the problem constraints are
discovered on the way towards the solution. Consequently,
solving these problems requires us to consider not only prior
knowledge but also the contextual knowledge that is built
throughout the task process based on the different operations

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

2

that the subject performs [12]. Moreover, the exploration of
the means given to solve the problem should facilitate the
generation of new stimuli, which can then help the learner to
make progress towards the goal by fulfilling sub-goals and
validating or invalidating hypotheses. This is exactly what
we would like to consider here. In particular, we aim to
consider the problem-solving process instead of considering
only performance scores of the task. Therefore, we need to
take into account the set of knowledge required to solve a
particular task and how it is managed. We hypothesize that
ontology representation is a powerful and relatively accessible
formalism to this end.

Learning with Tangible Objects: At a more concrete
level, we aim to study creative problem solving through
screen-less activities, also known as unplugged activities [13];
for instance, using tangible artifacts, such as pedagogical
robots or connected objects [14], or even every day objects.
This paradigm has demonstrated its efficiency, especially for
computational thinking initiation [13]. However, in contrast to
online activities on a computer, a non-trivial setup is required
to track the learning process through the activity. One of
the challenges is the use of efficient measurement devices of
reasonable cost. It also appears that a precise model of the task
allows us to define specific observables that are thus more
robust to estimate [14]. Another obstacle is the bias that is
induced by the fact that the learner is observed and monitored.
One solution is to take this as a chance to involve the learner
in their own learning process, which is the case with Open
Learner Models [15]. This is yet to be properly studied in this
context, see [16] for a discussion on these points. Ethical issues
of collecting human data in a way that ensures data privacy
also needs to be considered, to ensure that only required data
is effectively collected. For all these reasons, the construction
of a precise model of the task and of the learner involved in
this task is a lever to take up this challenge. Using tangible
material allows us to observe behavioral patterns [14] which, if
properly characterized, may help us infer cognitive processes.
The Observation Relevance Challenge: Properly charac-
terizing observable behavioral patterns can be difficult because
we are working on a relatively small batch of data (around a
hundred individuals, compared to the thousands of data used in
classical statistical methods). For the results to be meaningful,
we propose to introduce prior information upstream to the
analysis of the observables, which results in highly structured
data. This has led us to choose ontology modeling, which is an
appropriate tool to describe structured knowledge. This prior
information can come from existing theoretical models in the
learning sciences.

The Learner Modeling Challenges: This model is in-
tended to be applicable to the observables and learning an-
alytics, and to allow us to interpret them. Indeed, phenomeno-
logical models already exist — for example, the activity theory
[17] provides a framework that is appropriate to the context
of this study: it specifies an activity as performed by a subject
through the mediation of a tool to achieve a certain outcome.
Based on such phenomenological frameworks, our present
study is positioned at an operational level. We also hypothesize
that such an operationalization could benefit from a multi-

disciplinary perspective and we thus draw on behavioral mod-
els taken from neuro-cognitive science.

The finality of developing a computational model of a
computational thinking task [1] aims to contribute, as a long-
term perspective, to a better understanding, at a very concrete
level, of the fundamental notions regarding natural versus
artificial so-called intelligence, as studied in [2], including a
better understanding of our human intelligence. We focus on a
specific learning task instead of considering human learning at
a general level to offer a precise and operational formalization
that is translatable to other learning tasks.

This paper is an extension of a work that was originally
reported in Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Con-
ference on Development and Learning (ICDL) [18].

II. RELATED WORK

Ontologies to Model Learning Activities: A recent sys-
tematic review [19] of ontology use in education has observed
a growing trend in the contribution of ontologies to educational
systems in the last five years, and has identified the following
common use cases:

• Describing learning domains,
• Describing learner data,
• Modeling and managing curricula,
• Describing learning services.

In our case, we are particularly interested in works that attempt
to model both the learning domain and the learner data. This
has been done especially in intelligent tutoring systems and
adaptive learning systems, as reviewed in [20], where semantic
inference is performed on learning analytics and the learning
content to tune the resources that are presented to the learner
(e.g., in [21]). These studies are inspiring but they differ from
our approach in some important aspects.

Most reviewed approaches attempt to give a general model
the learner (i.e., in a diversity of learning tasks). From that
perspective, learner modeling is often directed towards classi-
fication of learners into several learner profiles with regard
to a set of characteristics, and by doing so to select
the
more adequate resources for a given learner (e.g., according
to learning styles in [22]). This is also the case for knowledge
representation beyond ontology approaches, such as those
related to the xAPI and game-based learning profiles [23].
The cognitive trajectories introduced by [24] are an interesting
approach to better understand the learner behavior, at a general
level or in a specific task.

Another point is that a large majority of these tasks are well
defined (e.g., well defined knowledge or how-to acquisition),
whereas we consider here a more open ill-defined problem
solving task. We can, however, cite the work of the Ludo Game
Model Ontology (LUDO) [25] to describe serious games.
These activities can be presented as open problems, and
(despite being not really reusable here, because it does not
involve tangible artifacts) the ontology itself includes both a
model of the game (task) and a model of the player (learner)
behavior.

Eventually, the goal of the existing ontologies is to improve
the learner’s performance [20], which is less easy to define in

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

3

our problem solving context (solving the problem faster does
not mean that we learn a lot from it) and is not our main
purpose, which is to better understand how we solve such an
open-ended problem.

With respect to these works, we introduce here computa-
tional and cognitive neuroscience knowledge in the modeling
process, which does not seem to be a current practice, and we
also consider open-ended problem solving, which is seldom
addressed.

Ontologies in Neuroscience and Cognitive Science: The
Cognitive Atlas1 [26] is a collaborative initiative that aims to
unify the vocabulary used in cognitive science and indexes
cognitive tasks described in the literature. It includes over 800
cognitive concepts but does not encompass much logic, aiming
for a more flexible approach. Its task model is partially based
on CogPO [27], which is another ontology that focuses on the
description of experimental paradigms used in neuroscience
(mainly fMRI) tasks. While CogPO might be slightly too
specific and medical-oriented for our problem, the Cognitive
Atlas encloses many of the cognitive concepts that we may
need to refer to in subsequent work. It also seems that the
concepts we target here are not (to the best of our knowledge)
addressed at the level of ontology modeling.

Beyond ontology-based methods, a wide spectrum of ap-
proaches, out of the scope of the present work, have been
recruited to model ill-defined creative problem solving; for
instance, using description logic, extended with probabilistic
approaches [28]. This example is interesting because the
authors have made the distinction between different types of
knowledge and memories, and considered its integration in a
cognitive architecture [29].

Considering Foundational Ontologies: A good practice
in ontology modeling is to base our model on a foundational
ontology to better specify the design choices by relating
our concepts to well-established formalized semantics and
facilitate the integration with other ontologies. Neuroscience
ontologies often rely on recommendations set by the Open
Biological and Biomedical Ontology (OBO) Foundry, which is
itself built on the principles of Basic Formal Ontology (BFO),
as is the case for CogPO. However, the ontological choices
made in BFO are meant
to represent real-world elements
and not, for example, mental states. Integration to biomedical
ontologies is not necessarily a requirement for us, and the
Cognitive Atlas, in that matter, is rather agnostic; therefore, a
more appropriate choice for us would likely be the Descriptive
Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering (DOLCE)
[30] which is general enough to be linked with both the
cognitive and learning science aspects of our formalization
work. In brief, it is a descriptive ontology of particulars that
“aims at capturing the ontological stands that shape natural
language and human cognition, based on the assumption that
the surface structure of natural language and the so-called
commonsense have ontological relevance” [30], which may
better fit which our paradigm.

III. MATERIAL AND THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

A. The #CreaCube Activity

This task has been designed considering the cognitive
science literature regarding problem solving tasks [6], [31], but
addressing here considerations regarding ill-defined problems.
The #CreaCube study2 focuses on problem-solving strate-
gies using modular robotic cubes, targeting children between
8 and 12 years old. The task is explained to the participants
as “building an autonomous vehicle, composed of four items,
able to move from a point A to another point B”, while a set
of four modular robotic cubes that differ in their appearances
(e.g., different colors) and features (e.g., wheels, switch etc.)
is given. The learner is expected to understand that the four
items are the four cubes on the table, to discover their behavior,
and to assemble these cubes into a certain configuration that
will be able to move autonomously. It is worth noting that
this problem does not have a unique solution because several
configurations may satisfy the goal requirements. Furthermore,
additional goals may emerge, such as understanding the cubes,
exploring alternative outcomes with those items, preserving the
ego with respect to the task achievement, experiencing playful
pleasure, and so on. The task is relatively easy in the sense
that most participants come up with a solution in less than 15
minutes but complex to model because of the large problem
space and the lack of specification (e.g., the possible actions,
i.e operators on the problem space states, are not clearly stated)
[12], which makes it an ill-defined problem.

In this activity, the participant has likely no prior experience
of the modular robotic cubes. To complete the task, there
is thus a need for exploration, defined here from a learning
science perspective, as a way to gather information from
the environment [32]. Throughout the task, the participant
moves towards the goal by mobilizing prior knowledge that
appears to make sense in relation to their experience with the
material being manipulated and the requirements defined by
the guideline. This includes understanding the artifacts, their
physical and technological characteristics, leading to formulate
hypotheses on the material and define sub-goals to solve the
problem. This process is better explained using the notion of
affordances [33], as detailed in section III-D.

The problem is modeled based not only on the knowledge
needed to solve it but also on the initial states of the hardware
and the final state for its success, as detailed in Fig. 1. We can
see the different observables taken into account (i.e., the pos-
sible configurations of the cubes—disassembled or assembled
into a certain shape), the identification and conceptualisation
of affordances (i.e., the practical possibilities offered by the
cubes, as we will further develop), the outcomes of actions per-
formed (e.g., at the motion level), and also elements regarding
the subject’s emotions or attitude (perseverance, abandonment)
towards the task. These observables will serve as a basis for
modeling the activity in the form of structured knowledge.

The data model that is generated from this interface has been
developed as a hierarchical data structure (in JSON syntax at
the file format level), with both the raw and computed data, as

1See http://www.cognitiveatlas.org/ for a browsable version, and on

2See https://creamaker.wordpress.com/2019/02/06/publications-

BioPortal for a reusable ontology version.

within-the-creamaker-project for full details

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

4

Fig. 1: Interface for the identification of observables, this figure describes a part of the system states to which is added, for example, the
identification of each cube (recognizable by its color: dark blue battery, black sensor, white motor, red inverter) and the states of the cubes
(e.g., “connected/disconnected” or “on/not on wheels”). This sub-ensemble of the possible states corresponds to the observables that have
been chosen to analyse the activity (see http://aide-line.inria.fr/public/doc/vid.mp4 for a video of the experiment.)

well as the description of each type of information and its rela-
tionships to other types. This allows formal manipulation and
representation of the collected information, as a first structur-
ing step towards an ontology representation, and integrated as
an interactive platform to facilitate the ergonomics of manual
video analysis [34]. Each video for the #CreaCube activity is
encoded as a temporal sequence of states, corresponding either
to a configuration of the activity material or to a state of the
learner engaged in the activity, as explained above (Fig. 1).
This is done manually by the experimenter using a dedicated
interactive interface. An example of encoded data generated
from the interface follows:
{

"idVideo": "v0001",
"nbParticipants": "1",
"events": [

{

"time": "12",
"tclicks": [

"U00",
"START1"

]

},
{

"time": "58",
"tclicks": [

"AF01"

]

},
{

"time": "73",
"tclicks": [

"AF04"

]

},
{

"time": "77",
"tclicks": [

"AF03"

]

},
{

"time": "95",
"tclicks": [

"AF02"

]

},
{

"time": "121",
"tclicks": [

"U00",
"S02"

]

},
{

"time": "146",
"tclicks": [

"F030-BSWI-F",

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

5

"P02"

]

},
[...]
{

"time": "232",
"tclicks": [

"F030-BIWS-F",
"P02"

]

},
{

"time": "268",
"tclicks": [

"F030-BIWS-T"

]

},
{

"time": "274",
"tclicks": [

"T03"

]

}

],
"idParticipant": "p0001",
"age": 11

}

The methodology to generate an organized set of learning
analytic log from video analysis has been developed from a
learning sciences perspective through the ANR CreaMaker3
project to study problem solving activities. Beyond the analy-
sis of observables for research purposes, these videos can also
be used to train the teachers who would be willing to put this
activity into practice within their classes. [35].

To allow for the analysis of the learner’s activity in the
context of the task, a formalization of the learning activity is
developed in the form of an ontology in the computational
sense that we will now define.

B. The Ontology Approach

Terminology: Ontologies allow us to represent structured
knowledge by defining concepts, as well as relationships and
hierarchies between these concepts. In the following, we use
the Web Ontology Language (OWL) terminology, as used in
the Semantic Web:

(i) Individuals represent atomic, real-world objects.
(ii) Classes represent concepts; a class may therefore be a
collection of individuals (which are called instances of
the class).

(iii) Individuals may be linked by relationships, which are
labeled by properties. Properties may have a domain
(i.e., the class that they can be applied to) and a range
(i.e., the class that they can take values from).

OWL also defines both class hierarchy and property hierar-
chy. This formalism allows us to structure and specify data that
can be provided in a standard such as the Resource Description
Framework (RDF).

3https://creamaker.wordpress.com

OWL specifications are based on description logics, pro-
viding in some cases4 computational completeness and de-
cidability (a didactic introduction can be found in this guide
[36]). This makes it possible to perform logical reasoning to
validate the model, as well as logical inference to find all
of the assertions that can be deduced from the user-defined
statements.

This representation could be improved using a numerical
weighting of RDF statements based on the notions of possi-
bility and necessity (in the sense of [37]) as proposed in [38],
but we shall not discuss this any further here.

Methodology:

[39] describes a simple methodology to

build an ontology in seven steps:
(a) Determine the domain and scope of the ontology.
(b) Consider reusing existing ontologies.
(c) Enumerate important terms in the ontology.
(d) Define the classes and the class hierarchy.
(e) Define the slots (i.e., the properties shared by a class).
(f) Define the facets of each slot (i.e., the possible values

that a property can take).

(g) Create instances.

Considering (a) the scope defined in the previous paragraph,
we have chosen to (b) rely on a lightweight version of the
DOLCE foundational principles (DOLCE+DnS UltraLite) and
reuse concepts defined in the Cognitive Atlas. This step (b) had
been overlooked in the first version of our work [18], which
we have thus revised to better integrate existing ontologies. In
the following, we describe (c,d,e,f) the terms used to define the
concepts and properties in our ontology (the slots refer here to
the properties shared by a class, and the facets to the possible
values that a property can take). Finally, we explicitize (g)
how we instantiated those classes.

Based on these elements, the ontology has been designed at
two levels. At the task material level, all cubes configurations
and other physical elements of the setup have been identified
and encoded, factorizing equivalent configurations (e.g., up to
a rotation), and reducing the state space to a few qualitative
relevant values. At the learner modeling level, considering the
previously published studies [12], [14], [40], our work has
been to formalize what has been experimentally determined
by learning scientists and education experts, including the
chosen pertinent observables. In order to do so, we have
attempted to rely on theoretical learning science and cognitive
science frameworks, and to identify the concepts that were the
most relevant for our context. Observing experiment courses
and discussing with the learning experimenters allowed us to
capture those different aspects, both at the task level and at
the learner level, and specify them as ontology entities.

C. Borrowing from Learning Sciences: Learner Modeling
Framework and the Activity Theory

As previously mentioned, the growing use of intelligent
tutoring systems (ITS) led to a need for the development of
consistent learner models. Dillenbourg and Self [41] proposed

4Several OWL “profiles” are available, each of them providing a different
trade-off between expressivity and reasoning power. The OWL-DL profile
fully adheres to description logic principles and is thus decidable.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

6

a general framework for learner modeling in problem-solving
activities, considering two dimensions: on the one hand, they
distinguished the system from the learner and defined concepts
regarding the system’s representation of the learner; and on the
other hand, they established a distinction between behavior,
behavioral knowledge, and conceptual knowledge. Behav-
ioral knowledge refers to a set of rules and primitives that can
be used to infer some behavior for a given problem P, whereas
conceptual knowledge contains the definition of the concepts
underlying the behavioral knowledge. This representation al-
lows us to precisely define, for example, misconceptions
(i.e., the difference between the learner’s and the system’s
conceptual knowledge) or bugs (i.e., the difference between
the learner’s and the system’s behavioral knowledge). In our
case, even if we are not implementing a tutoring system, we
are in the situation of a system observing the learner’s behavior
and inferring their knowledge. Moreover, the problem is ill-
defined from the point of view of the learner, but it can be
well-specified from the point of view of the system to guide
the analysis of the observables, which is what we are trying
to achieve here.

This framework does not really address the use of tangible
artifacts in problem-solving activities. The activity theory [17]
fills in the blank by introducing the notion of tools that play
the role of mediator for the activity, which enables the learner
(subject) to pursue a goal (object). Fig. 2 shows how we
incorporate these notions into the learner modeling framework
proposed by Dillenbourg & Self. In #CreaCube, the tools
are the cubes and the waypoints, and the main object is to
solve the problem (e.g., build a vehicle). In what follows, we
will see how this main goal can be broken down into sub-
goals (which can be in concurrence). We will also explicitize
how the aforementioned conceptual and behavioral knowledge
can be understood in light of the distinction that is made in
cognitive neuroscience between different types of memory.

D. Borrowing from Cognitive Sciences

Memories in Interaction: The role of memory in learning,
and more precisely the interactions between memories that
are of several types [42], is of primary importance at the
neuroscience cognitive level. Traditionally, a distinction has
been made between short-term (i.e., working) memory and
long-term explicit (or declarative) and implicit memories, with
regard to how long the information was allegedly stored in the
brain. Working memory is considered not simply as a system
for the transitory storage of information but also as a pro-
cessing system [43]). Incoming stimuli perceived by sensory
modalities are encoded in a sensory “buffer” (sometimes called
sensory memory, e.g. [44]) where they persist very briefly.
After being filtered through attentional mechanisms, some of
them can be temporarily retained in working memory for fu-
ture use and manipulation. For example, when solving a prob-
lem, working memory makes it possible to store traces useful
to the processes involved in carrying out the task, as well as
updating them as the task progresses. Because these processes
often require prior information, working memory also enables
retrieval from longer-term memories. Procedural memory

is an example of implicit memory: it stores know-how and
integrated procedures that have been automatized, such as
motor skills. These procedures are gradually learned through a
transfer from declarative and working memories. Declarative
memories can themselves be distinguished between semantic
and episodic. Semantic memory stores general knowledge
about facts and concepts, while episodic memory refers to
the subjective experience of the individual: it stores traces
of past events that are contextualized in time and space, and
associated to emotional data. They are stored as sequences of
events called episodes, which can later be replayed forwards
or backwards or rearranged, thus providing off-line learning.
Eventually, recurrent patterns in these episodes can be con-
solidated into more generalized traces in semantic memory or
procedural memory. Episodic memory is therefore believed to
play a crucial role in human learning [45]. These concepts
form the basic architecture of the learner cognitive modeling
proposed here.

Goals and Related Executive Cognitive Functions: Solv-
ing a problem requires one to set some goals. The main goal
is to complete the task, but in order to do so, this task usually
needs to be broken down in several sub-tasks, thus yielding
several sub-goals. In the context of #CreaCube, the main goal
given by the guideline translates into the concrete realization
of a vehicle, using the four cubes presented on the table, that
is able to move autonomously from the red point to the black
point. Assembling the cubes into a valid configuration is a goal
in itself, while making it move in the right direction is another.
These high-level goals yield new sub-goals on the sensori-
motor level—to assemble two cubes, one needs to localize
them and mobilize specific motor skills to grasp them and put
them together.

We consider here a framework of cognitive architecture in
which these goals can be organized around four fundamental
questions [46] that relate to the learner’s cognitive functions:
(i) What is the object of the goal? (ii) Why does it answer
some current motivation or specification? (iii) Where is it
located and how can it be accessed? And, (iv) how can it
be manipulated and more generally addressed by a skill? This
description of the goals represent an operational way to deal
with all semantic, motivational and sensori-motor aspects of
a goal to be considered in problem solving, consistent with
what is known about associative neural circuits.

We also wish to consider goal orientation [47], distinguish-
ing between mastery goals and performance goals. Participants
concerned with mastery are oriented to develop task-related
self-improvement [48], while those focusing on performance
aim to achieve the task objective using “known ways to
quickly implement knowledge and skills that have already
been mastered” [49].

Creative Use of Affordances: Building with modular
bricks is based on visuo-spatial constructive play objects [50]
used for engaging learners into tangible programming brick
games [51], [52] with modular educational robots [40], [53].
In the context of an ill-defined problem solving task [31],
the affordances of the robotic elements will
influence the
actions of the participant [54] towards the objects (observing,
grasping, assembling). Indeed, as opposed to a well-defined

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

7

Fig. 2: Framework chosen for the analysis of the observables, adapted from Dillenbourg & Self [41] completed by the activity theory [17].
This framework corresponds to the learning science concepts taken into account for the construction of the ontology. The observables are
the ones described in Fig. 1. See text for more details.

problem, the legal operators that can be considered to act
on the problem states are not specified here. Instead, they
are suggested by the physical features of the artifacts: for
example, the blue cube has a switch on one of its faces, ap-
pealing to be activated. The exploration of one’s environment
(as developed in the next paragraph) aims to discover such
affordances, as defined by Gibson [33] as “opportunities of
actions” offered by the physical properties of this environment.
Through their interactions with the task material, the learner
relates the perceived physical properties of the artifacts to prior
knowledge stored in long-term memories (e.g., a switch can
be flipped to activate a device) and generates new hypotheses.
Affordances are a way to make sense of stimuli, and a key
point in the creative process is to be able to think of different
appropriate ways to use the material to solve the problem,
using mechanisms such as analogy to transfer knowledge from
a task to another [3], [4], [10].

Exploration vs Exploitation: While the notion of explo-
ration and exploitation is well known in cognitive science and
in machine learning at the level of reinforcement learning, they
are two distinct conceptualizations that we will now make ex-
plicit. In problem-solving activities, subjects alternate between
two main strategies: exploration, which aims at experimenting
with new alternatives or acting on the environment to generate
new stimuli [32], and exploitation, which is the use of existing
knowledge (semantic or procedural) in a given situation. At
this level of description, we can draw parallels with these
notions in reinforcement-based machine learning, but in this
second domain exploration is mostly random, whereas in
problem solving as studied in learning sciences, exploration
is seen as a strategy for generating new stimuli or new ideas

or behaviors by recombining prior knowledge or behaviors,
or by manipulating the environment. These are therefore two
quite distinct notions: one corresponding to an internal process
of generating new internal representations, and the other to a
behavior that is only defined with regard to a direct interaction
with the environment.

Convergent vs Divergent Thinking:

In relation to the
previous distinction between two strategies — exploitation and
exploration —, we can also introduce an alternation between
two modes of thinking — convergent and divergent. Diver-
gent thinking is directed towards idea generation (fostering
originality and novelty), while convergent thinking focuses
on selecting an effective candidate solution to the problem
(ensuring adequation). These two processes, consistent with
the previous definition of creativity, have been defined to
be central to creative cognition [3] and are characterized by
measurable indicators [55]. This brings another perspective
to the goal definition that was addressed earlier: during the
divergent phase, goals and their sub-goals thus unfold into tree
structures that take shape through stimuli and experiences, and
are reunited during the convergent phase so as to achieve the
final goals.

E. Concept Selection and Instantiation Methodology for the
Ontology Implementation

In order to implement the Learner model of the ontology, we
selected several concepts in relation to the previous theoretical
frameworks:

Perceptions are internal representations of stimuli formed
by the learner. Traces of these perceptions are processed in
working memory and may be stored in the long term in

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

8

episodic memory. Conceptual knowledge as defined in III-C
is for the most part stored in semantic memory and can be
retrieved in working memory when it is relevant. Behavioral
knowledge as defined in III-C consists of procedures and
inference rules that are not convenient to represent in the OWL
formalism because they are not declarative (e.g., procedural).
the result of such inferences,
However, we can represent
which are drawn by the learner by contextualizing pieces of
conceptual knowledge with regard to their perceptions. We
have called these inferences hypotheses: they are temporary
representations formed by the learner to make sense of the
environment. Hypotheses are only relevant for a short time
interval within the task (e.g., the execution of a plan associated
with a goal) and we can assume they are only temporarily
stored and used by the working memory. When they have
been verified (thus believed by the learner as true), they can
be maintained in the working memory to pursue the task but
they are not questioned anymore (unless a new stimulus raises
a contradiction). We can assume that hypotheses that were
useful to complete the task may have a more durable print
and be stored in episodic memory. The learner’s goals are
broken down into the four queries described in III-D (namely,
What, Why, Where, How) and towards mastery vs performance
goal orientation.

These concepts have been instantiated step by step, based on
the design of the task itself and preliminary video observations
of the first participants [56]. Further details were collected
the participants were asked
during a post-activity survey:
several questions about what they did and what they learned
about the activity material. Some elements were also noted
throughout the task when the learners were speaking out loud,
to themselves or to the experimenter (there was no directive
to the participants about whether they should speak during the
task or not; the experimenters were, on their side, required not
to answer the participants’ questions).

(a) Observe all of the possible actions and break them down
into elementary actions (e.g., assembling three cubes
decomposes into assembling two cubes and connecting
a third one to the resulting structure).

(b) Identify the contexts in which each action was executed
to determine which are the preconditions (necessary or
optional) and in which state the system is after the action
has been performed (post-conditions).

(c) Identify, from the material changes, what stimuli are
raised and how they are perceived (e.g., when the power
switch is on, a diode lights up).

(d) Specify the hypotheses and knowledge:

• Conceptual knowledge relevant to the task was mostly
identified prior to the experiment, as part of the activity
design (e.g., what is considered as a vehicle, what are
its main elements).

• Hypothesis instances are issued from both preliminary
observations by the experimenters of the resolution by
different subjects and evaluation interviews after the
activity, as discussed for instance in [40], [53].
(e) Finally, identify how these hypotheses and knowledge are
pre-requisite for others and might drive the participant’s

goals.

(f) Associate the actions listed in (b) with the learner goals,
issued from the activity observation, while also consid-
ering goal orientation and broken down into elementary
goals corresponding to the four cognitive queries.

These are clearly preliminary prior assumptions to bootstrap
a first version of the ontology, with the perspective to adapt
them from further observation by learning sciences experts and
logical validation by ontological reasoners.

IV. ONTOLOGY IMPLEMENTATION
We implemented the ontology5 using the software Prot´eg´e6.
First, we formalized the classes corresponding to the ma-
terial environment of the task, and the classes referring to
the learner’s cognition and behavior. Then, we have defined
specific classes and properties to include the observables of the
task, which are situated in time, such as events and situations
(in the sense of DOLCE+DnS Ultralite). Finally, we have
instantiated these classes, listing their individuals based on
the task design itself and the observations collected during the
experiments, according to the methodology described in III-E.

A. Modeling the Activity Process

The #CreaCube activity itself is a dul:Process; that is to say,
considered in its evolution. Each scene of interest annotated in
the videos is a dul:Situation, which we call an ActivityState.
Activity states are transitional and situated in time. To
account for this transitionality, we use the Description &
Situation ontology pattern7 of DOLCE+DnS Ultralite (we now
use the prefix dul: for pre-defined entities).

that

A dul:Situation is, as per the entity specification, a relational
context
is created by an observer on the basis of a
dul:Description. Consequently, a dul:Description is itself a
conceptualization that provides an interpretation for a set of
entities in a given situation.

We consider here two aspects of the activity situation: the
learner’s mental representation (their representation of the
scene) and the material states, from the point of view of an
expert of the activity (cf Fig2). We therefore assign, for each
ActivityState, two kinds of dul:Description: a MaterialStat-
eDescription and a LearnerMentalRepresentation.

B. Modeling the Material States

The task involves several tools (in the sense of the activity
theory), which can consist in dul:PhysicalObjects (cubes, way-
points) or dul:SocialObjects (guideline recording). Physical
objects have features that can themselves be considered as
physical objects constitutive of the cubes (e.g., switch, wheels,
magnets etc.). The cubes can be assembled into multiple
configurations (encoded by a series of letters and numbers
as per Fig. 1) characterizing the material states. As opposed
to transitional material states, physical objects have a proper

5This ontology is publicly available here:

https://line.gitlabpages.inria.fr/aide-group/creaonto/

6https://github.com/protegeproject
7http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Submissions:

DescriptionAndSituation

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

9

Fig. 3: A partial diagram exposing the main classes defined in our ontology. The tools mediating the activity are highlighted in red boxes.
In green are the other classes related to the observables. Those in blue characterize the learner’s behavior and mental representations. Some
classes extend the ones defined in the Cognitive Atlas (prefixed by ca:) and/or in the DOLCE+DnS Ultralite ontology (prefixed by dul:).
The symbol “<” in labels stands for “isA” when the node is not expanded for concision purposes.

space region and mass. Their state is represented by the values
taken by certain properties called dul:Quality (e.g., color) in a
given qualitative dul:Region (e.g., red): for example, a switch
has the quality of being either ON or OFF.

Material states are characterized by a specific configurations
of those physical objects, their quality values, and correspond
to the observables shown on Fig 3. We have also listed the
possible permutations of the cubes within each configuration
shape, so that each configuration encoding (e.g., “F000-BSIW-
T”) is characterized by its connections. These connections are
themselves specified by the cubes they connect along what
spatial axis. This allows us to give a better description of the
material states and relates them to their JSON encodings.

These material states represent the problem space of the
task in the sense of [6]. Indeed, the goal states of the task
are those where the cubes are in a configuration that satisfies
the guideline (which is itself a dul:Description describing the
requirements for a state to be a solution state). The participants
may interact with the material and change its state through
their actions: this is formalized as follows in the sequel.

C. Modeling the Learner’s Behavior and Mental States

Actions and Affordances: Some actions are only available
to the learner in some particular states of the material envi-
ronment. These states define the preconditions of the action.
Similarly, post-conditions define changes of state that an
action results in. These pre- and post-conditions also constitute
knowledge to acquire. They are represented in the ontology by

properties linking a dul:Task (referring to the execution of an
action) to an ActivityState (i.e. the dul:Situation before and
after the action has been performed). Actions are suggested
by the physical objects—or their features—that the learner
relates to their knowledge, which we introduced earlier as
Affordances. Affordances allow a dul:Task to be executed.
When appropriate, we related those affordances to the ones
defined in AfNet [57], a semantic network aiming at catego-
rizing structural affordances based on physical properties of
objects.

the activity,

Stimuli and Perceptions: Throughout

the
learners receive various stimuli from the material environment.
Stimuli are sometimes modeled as events in DOLCE-based
ontologies, as is the case in the Stimulus-Sensor-Observation
ontology [58]. Indeed, in the #CreaCube activity, stimuli are
most often the result of events occurring when participants
proactively interact with the environment. For instance, when
they flip the switch on the blue cube, a diode lights up
the learner may
as a response to their action. However,
not always perceive stimuli as soon as a triggering event
occurs, and stimuli might remain in the environment for some
time before the learner focuses their attention on it (e.g.,
the diode that lights up is very small and some participants
only notice it later). Therefore, we prefer to view them as
sensory information input provided to the learner, rather than
events themselves; hence, extending the InformationObject
class. When they are filtered by the attentional focus of the
traces of these stimuli are kept active during the
learner,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

10

task before being eventually consolidated as knowledge. These
traces constitute Perceptions: they are a conceptualization of
the perceived stimuli, thus a kind of dul:Description.

Knowledge Retrieval, Hypotheses and Goals: To com-
plete the task, the learner needs to retrieve knowledge that has
been acquired in the course of past experiences and learning.
Most of the time, this knowledge is activated through the
discovery of affordances. For instance, after finding of the
wheels, the learner might retrieve the fact that wheels on a
vehicle must be in contact with the ground to allow it to move.
It can also be activated by the concepts evoked in the guideline.
As we explained in section III-C, we previously distin-
guished between conceptual knowledge and behavioral knowl-
edge before deciding to represent only ConceptualKnowledge
in the ontology because behavioral knowledge consists of
procedures and inference rules that are,
in our case, not
declarative. However, we accounted for the result of inferences
with the class Hypothesis, representing hypotheses drawn by
the learner by contextualizing pieces of conceptual knowledge
with regard to their perceptions.

ConceptualKnowledge, Perceptions and Hypotheses are all
mental representations that the learner forms to make sense of
the environment. These items extend the class dul:Description
and are interdependent (i.e. some of them can be inferred or
induced from others). These dependencies are represented by
ontological properties, such as requires (logical necessity), in-
duces (inductive reasoning) and isEvidenceFor/hasEvidenceIn
(e.g., when a perception tends to confirm a hypothesis).

Instead of directly identifying discrepancies at the behav-
ioral knowledge level (which were called bugs in [41] and on
Fig 2), we identified misperceptions and misinterpretations.
Misperceptions happen when internal representations of stim-
uli formed by the learner are erroneous; for example, if the
learner misheard the guideline, did not see a visible feature
on the cubes, or mistook the dark blue cube for another
black cube. Misinterpretations refer to erroneous hypotheses
that can be inferred, either from misperceptions or from
some conceptual knowledge not transferable to the situation
at hand. For example, the fact that wheels automatically start
to turn after the user has pulled the vehicle backwards is only
applicable in certain situations—most often, this mechanism
is found in children car toys. However, in this task, trying to
press down on the white cube by manually rolling it back-
wards will not cause it to move forward autonomously. Such
misinterpretations can be corrected after verification showing
a lack of evidence in favor of the hypothesis. Nonetheless, if
it comes from a misconception that the underlying conceptual
principle is a general truth that is valid in any situation, then it
might hinder the completion of the task: as long as the learner
keeps on trying to make the wheels work this way, they might
not look for other clues.

This makes it clear that the learner needs to understand
which pieces of knowledge are effectively applicable in the
context of the activity and relevant to complete it. Testing
hypotheses thus defines sub-goals that will help to solve the
problem. As described in section III-D, goals are a way for
the participant to organize their understanding of the task and
plan their actions hierarchically. Global goals (essentially re-

sponding to What and Why, in relation to high-level executive
functions [46]) may be instructed by an external direction—
the guideline—or a metacognitive reflection,
in this case,
inducing (Where, How) sensori-motor mechanisms [46] thus
yielding sub-goals at a more local level. This goal hierarchy is
represented in our ontology through the property hasSubGoal.

V. RESULTS AND PERSPECTIVES OF APPLICATION

A. Modeling as an Interdisciplinary Tool

This work allowed us to confirm the multiple interest of
working with ontological modeling when we bring together
three disciplines (educational, cognitive and computer sci-
ences) to tackle a problem, as follows:

• Terminological interest to begin with: beyond periphrases
and phenomenological descriptions in each discipline,
constraining us to define things through lexical choices
and fully specified properties and relations between these
key words, forcing us to clearly posit what we are talking
about.

• Interest in formalization: this approach allows, without
even using algorithmic reasoning skills at this stage, to
take stock of what can be defined rigorously to formalize
completely.

Defining a well-formulated ontology is therefore already
by itself a structuring exercise, an epistemological tool in a
way, before even using it. As with any modeling, it gives an
exhaustive and explicit view of what is to retain compared
to what is neglected. Once the specification has been set, the
use of available reasoners, such as Pellet or Hermit, allows to
check its consistency and query the data on the consequences
that may or may not be drawn from it.

This being done, we also have an immediate check of
the model properties, in particular its logical coherence and
soundness. This not only allows us to verify the absence
of contradictory statements but we also experimented that
if our definitions are not sufficiently specified, then we can
easily deduce spurious consequences (e.g., mixing categories
of concepts). We thus have an operational tool to verify the
completeness of our formalization.

An illustrative example of how a JSON video annotation

can be translated into this formalism is given here.

B. Reasoning About the Model

A query language, such as SPARQL in the case of RDF
data, combined with a reasoner (in our case, Pellet8), allows us
to retrieve specific information —asserted or inferred— from
our model. This raises some perspectives of application both at
the material level and at the learner level. Let us illustrate each
aspect in the following examples, the former being already
operational and the latter being still at an exploratory stage.

Link the Material Configuration Encodings to the Mate-
rial States: At the material level, this ontology can be used
to retrieve physical information from configuration encodings.

8https://www.w3.org/2001/sw/wiki/Pellet

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

11

goal-driven mode, the result of a more elaborate reasoning,
such as an attempt to understand the function of the blue
cube (thus testing the hypothesis that it is indeed a switch)
or, this hypothesis being verified, to activate the movement
of the vehicle. Characterizing whether the learner is rather in
a goal-driven or stimulus-driven mode, as precisely defined
in [18], [56], for a given sequence of observables might
be inferred from the timestamps recorded in the data. This
helps us decide which statements of the ontology are more
appropriate to describe the observed situation. For example,
we could assume that once the learner has identified a goal,
and have the means and resources at their disposal to fulfill
it, then the flow of their actions might be smoother; whereas,
in an exploration situation, there might be more pauses cor-
responding to the delay between new stimuli. However, this
link between timestamps and switch of strategy is not yet well
understood and needs further examination. Another difficulty
is the high computational complexity of assertions regarding
the learner behavior, which does not scale well with a large
knowledge base and may lead to poor reasoning performances.

Predicting the Learner’s Behavior:

Instead of querying the model using backward chaining as
in the previous example, we could also use forward chaining
to simulate the learner’s deduction, hence predicting their
behavior. For example, we might wonder how the learner
would react to the visual stimulus of seeing the switch. In
a stimulus-driven mode, they would likely touch it or try
to flip it (assuming that the knowledge relative to switches
being flipped has become a procedural knowledge, that is
to say automated into an almost reflex behavior). In a goal-
driven mode, we may infer that the learner will elaborate the
hypothesis that the switch can be used to activate the vehicle,
which will result in planning goals (flip the switch, connect
the cube to the structure) and sub-goals (they have to grasp
the cube before connecting it to the others).

This ontology thus provides a subset of plausible behaviors.
However, we still need a way to decide which of these behav-
iors to choose to simulate the learner. Mechanisms to explain
what the learner’s attention is more focused on in a given
situation are still to be developed. Moreover, we need to take
into account
inter-individual differences: some participants
might be more interested in achieving a performance goal, thus
appealing for a predominant exploitation strategy, whereas
others might pursue a mastery goal and try to understand as
much as possible about the environment of the task, displaying
more exploratory behaviors.

VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This study introduces the operationalization of a creative
problem-solving task. Within this type of task, we need to
consider both exploration and exploitation strategies directed
toward different concurrent goals (e.g., performance versus
mastery). These goals refer to an objective (What) but we
also need to consider the Why; that is, extrinsic motivation
(e.g., task performance) and intrinsic motivation (e.g., increase
knowledge). They result in concrete plans to achieve them
(Where and How). The execution of such plans is the ob-
servable behavior of the learner that we attempt to capture

Fig. 4: Examples of a SPARQL query 9on the material states:
Retrieving connections and cubes for a given configuration.

In the JSON annotations of the videos, configurations tested
by the subject are encoded as strings of characters and letters
(e.g., “F000-BSIW-T”) that are not intelligible at a first glance,
and hard to relate to real-world connections between the cubes.
The ontology does this strenuous work for us: by querying a
configuration by its encoding, we can retrieve the associated
connections between the cubes. Corresponding ontology as-
sertions are based on simple geometric considerations and the
design of the cubes provided by the manufacturer. Conversely,
we can also query the knowledge base on configurations which
have, for instance, a connection between the blue cube and
the red cube. Integrating an ontology-based module to the
annotation interface might help to avoid encoding mistakes.
A step further, we could also add some transformation rules
between those configurations to validate the pre- and post-
conditions of the learner’s actions to verify the consistency
of the annotations on a sequential scale. For example, if the
learner has disconnected two cubes from each other, then
we should see that there is one less connection in the new
configuration.

Inferring an Internal Representation of the Learner from

an Observable:

At the learner behavior level, the main perspective of this
work would be to interpret observables and infer, for example,
the participants’ goals and associated plans or motivations.
Although more data and further investigation is needed to
validate the relevance of the ontology inferences on this aspect,
we propose here the general idea of such an application.

Storing domain knowledge about behavioral processes in
an ontology allows to consistently interpret new data. For
example, we may observe a new action which changes the
state of the switch, and wonder what motivated the learner
to execute this action. As illustrated by Fig. 5, a SPARQL
query on the model helps us retrieve that the action may have
been either a simple reaction to the stimulus of seeing the
switch, in the case of a stimulus-driven behavior, or, in a

9We used the Prot´eg´e Snap-SPARQL plugin which allows us to per-
form logical
inference and answer queries not only based on asserted
data but also inferred data: https://github.com/protegeproject/
snap-sparql-query

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

12

(b) SPARQL results returned for the query (a): We enquired about which actions change the
state of the blue switch, what stimuli may have provoked them, or what goal they might be
aiming at, and if that goal might be the sub-goal of another one, as well as what knowledge
they are using and what hypothesis might be tested.

(a) An example SPARQL query

Fig. 5: Examples of SPARQL queries on the learner’s behavior.

and formalize in our ontology. Through this process, we take
into account the stimuli received during the interactions of the
learner with the modular robotic cubes, and the perception
and interpretation of the different technological affordances
that will support the problem-solving activity through concrete
actions to be executed. The learner’s prior knowledge is
mobilised to understand current perceptions and transform
knowledge into a way that makes sense within the context
of activity [59], formulating and testing in-task hypotheses.

This formalization was achieved step by step with the aim
of encapsulating domain knowledge used by learning science
researchers when they analyze such an experiment, in order
to make it more robust and reproducible. The purpose of this
description is not to remain phenomenological; that is, driven
by a theoretical framework expressed in human language to
guide the analysis of the data. We hereby reformulate these
to give us the means to
notions at a computational level
process them in a more systematic way using an algorithmic
approach, as discussed here, formalizing the concepts invoked
in a precise language.

As stated in the introduction, we model the learning behav-
ior engaged in a problem-solving activity that is ill-defined at
the participant level, while the activity state space is entirely
formalized at the observer level. As such, our approach is
voluntarily specific, while the proposed methodology is easy
to generalize, as pointed out in [16] where three other com-
putational thinking learning tasks have been also considered.
From the paradigm choice to rely on an ontology modeling
to the general knowledge about cognition when engaged in
a creative problem solving task, an important part of this
formalization translates to another learning task. Relying on
a robust foundational ontology such as DOLCE also ensures
compatibility and facilitates such knowledge transfer. Besides,
our paradigm is based on frameworks that are already widely
used in learning sciences such as the activity theory and the
ITS learner/observer representation, combined with a cogni-
tive basis. A step further, the query-based specification of
goals and the hypothetico-deductive process might also be
reconcilable with, e.g, the Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) model

commonly used in AI and inspired by psychology to formalize
rational agents [60], where knowledge and hypotheses would
constitute beliefs with various degrees of confidence, desires
may correspond to the What/Why of the learner’s goals, and
intentions to the procedures considered to reach these goals,
i.e. Where/How.

For obvious ethical reasons, the learner is aware of being
engaged in a task with learning analytic evaluation. To what
extends this could perturb the outcomes has been addressed in
[40], in fact only marginally. Besides, this could be turned
into a significant advantage, since it
is a way to engage
the participants in understanding their own learning process,
opening opportunities to meta-learning.

This is only a first step but it already shows that formalizing
such a problem-solving activity is a complex but attainable
work. To complete this formal description, one of the next
steps would be to better formalize the relationship between
affordances and knowledge (e.g., we could draw inspiration
from [61] who proposed a design pattern involving the use of
frames).We also consider to address the emotional aspect, such
as how to identify observable emotions (e.g., the ones listed in
Fig. 1) and link inferred cognitive states to emotional states.
Finally, we need to make use of reasoning mechanisms to
better infer the subject internal motivation and behaviors from
the experiment observables (e.g., learner state observation,
post-activity evaluation) and conduct statistical analyses on the
results to assess the validity of such an application.

With respect to the state of the art, briefly reviewed pre-
viously, our approach applies to tangible activities, modeling
both the task and the learner in the task, and targeting a better
understanding of the learning process, more than increasing
the learning performance. This approach is rather disruptive
with respect to learning science because, to the best of our
knowledge,
there has not been such modeling of an ill-
defined task using an ontology, including a triple-disciplinary
contribution from learning science, cognitive neuroscience and
computer science, from which could emerge computational
learning science [62].

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

13

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre, Margarida Romero and Thierry Vi´eville
are gratefully acknowledged for powerful ideas at the origin
of this study and their contributions to the first version of this
work presented in [18], with special thanks to the latter for
his punctual help regarding this paper. We also wish to thank
Lisa Roux and Lola Denet for their preliminary work on the
ontology, especially on the task model and the learner model,
respectively.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Romero, A. Lepage, and B. Lille, “Computational

thinking
development
through creative programming in higher education,”
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education,
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–15, Dec. 2017, number: 1 Publisher: SpringerOpen.
[Online]. Available: https://educationaltechnologyjournal.springeropen.
com/articles/10.1186/s41239-017-0080-z

[2] F. Alexandre, J. Becker, M.-H. Comte, A. Lagarrigue, R. Liblau,
M. Romero, and T. Vi´eville, “Open Educational Resources and MOOC
for Citizen Understanding of Artificial Intelligence,” Jul. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03024034

[3] J. Guilford, The nature of human intelligence, ser. The nature of human

intelligence. New York, NY, US: McGraw-Hill, 1967.

[4] F. Alexandre, “Creativity explained by Computational Cognitive
on
[Online]. Available:

Neuroscience,”
Computational Creativity, Sep. 2020, p. 4.
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02891491

International Conference

ICCC’20

in

-

[5] A. Dietrich, “The cognitive neuroscience of creativity,” Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1011–1026, Dec. 2004. [Online].
Available: http://link.springer.com/10.3758/BF03196731
[6] A. Newell and H. A. Simon, Human problem solving.
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972, oCLC: 622041645.

Englewood

[7] J. M. Wing, “Computational

the
ACM, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 33–35, Mar. 2006. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1118178.1118215

thinking,” Communications of

[8] M. Lodi, “Introducing Computational Thinking in K-12 Education:
Historical, Epistemological, Pedagogical, Cognitive, and Affective
Aspects,” phdthesis, Dipartimento di Informatica - Scienza e Ingegneria,
Alma Mater Studiorum - Universit`a di Bologna, Apr. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://hal.inria.fr/tel-02981951

[9] L. Heiser, M. Romero, and V. Prokofieva Nelson, “Analyse des activit´es
technocr´eatives au coll`ege en contexte d’´education FabLab,” Universit´e
Cˆote d’Azur, Tech. Rep., Jan. 2022.

[10] W. S. De Grave, H. P. A. Boshuizen, and H. G. Schmidt, “Problem
based learning: Cognitive and metacognitive processes during problem
analysis,” Instructional Science, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 321–341, Sep. 1996.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00118111

[11] T. Vi´eville, “An improved biologically plausible trajectory generator,”
[Online]. Available: https://hal.inria.fr/

report, Sep. 2002.

INRIA,
inria-00072049

[12] M. Romero, “CreaCube, analyse de la r´esolution cr´eative de probl`emes
par le biais d’une tˆache de robotique modulaire,” in Journ´ees Nationales
de la Recherche en Robotique, JNRR 2017. Femto-st, 2017, p. 1.

[13] W. Huang and C.-K. Looi,

pedagogies

“A critical

“unplugged”

literature
and
thinking education,” Computer Science Education,
eprint:
[Online]. Available:

on
computational
vol. 0, no. 0, pp. 1–29, Jul. 2020, publisher: Routledge
https://doi.org/10.1080/08993408.2020.1789411.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08993408.2020.1789411

review of

in K-12

computer

science

[14] M. Romero, D. David,

and B. Lille,

a Playful
Activity with Modular Robotics,” in Games and Learning Alliance,
M. Gentile, M. Allegra, and H. S¨obke, Eds.
Cham: Springer
series
International Publishing, 2019, vol. 11385, pp. 397–405,
Title: Lecture Notes
[Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-11548-7 37

in Computer Science.

“CreaCube,

[15] S. Bull and J. Kay, “Open Learner Models,” in Advances

in
Intelligent Tutoring Systems, ser. Studies in Computational Intelligence,
R. Nkambou,
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, pp. 301–322. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-14363-2 15

and R. Mizoguchi, Eds.

J. Bourdeau,

[16] S. Barnab´e, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, E. Pascual,
M. Romero, and T. Vi´eville, “A low-cost tabletop game to collect
thinking using unplugged
learning analytics during computational
or tangible activities,” Inria, report, Dec. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03040909

[17] Y. Engestrom, “Activity theory as a framework for analyzing and
redesigning work,” Ergonomics, vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 960–974, Jul. 2000.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/001401300409143

[18] C. Mercier, L. Roux, M. Romero, F. Alexandre, and T. Vi´eville,
“Formalizing Problem Solving in Computational Thinking : an Ontology
approach,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Development and
Learning (ICDL), Beijing, China, Aug. 2021, pp. 1–8.

[19] K. Stancin, P. Poscic, and D. Jaksic, “Ontologies in education
art,” Education and Information Technologies,
[Online]. Available:

– state of
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 5301–5320, Nov. 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-020-10226-z

the

[20] G. George and A. M. Lal, “Review of ontology-based recommender
systems in e-learning,” Computers & Education, vol. 142, p. 103642,
Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360131519301952

[21] A. Nouira,

L.

and

framework

Cheniti-Belcadhi,

“An
for
ontology-based
Engineering
massive
Education,
2019,
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/cae.22155. [On-
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cae.
line]. Available:
22155

R.
assessment
Applications
pp.
6,

in
1343–1360,

learning,”
vol.

Braham,
analytics

Computer

no.

27,

of

[22] J. Perisic, M. Milovanovic, and Z. Kazi, “A semantic approach to
enhance moodle with personalization,” Comput. Appl. Eng. Educ., 2018.
[23] J. Torrente, P. Moreno-Ger, I. Mart´ınez-Ortiz, and B. Fernandez-Manjon,
“Integration and Deployment of Educational Games in e-Learning
Environments: The Learning Object Model Meets Educational Gaming,”
Journal of Educational Technology & Society, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 359–
371, 2009, publisher: International Forum of Educational Technology &
Society. [Online]. Available: https://www.jstor.org/stable/jeductechsoci.
12.4.359

[24] K. Fuchs and P. A. Henning, “Cognitive Space Time: A Model
for Human-Centered Adaptivity in E-Learning,” in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation
(ICE/ITMC). Stuttgart: IEEE, Jun. 2018, pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8436283/

[25] S. Tang and M. Hanneghan, “Game Content Model: An Ontology
for Documenting Serious Game Design,” in 2011 Developments in E-
systems Engineering, Dec. 2011, pp. 431–436.

[26] R. Poldrack, A. Kittur, D. Kalar, C. Seppa, Y. Gil, D. Parker, F. Sabb,
and R. Bilder, “The Cognitive Atlas: Toward a Knowledge Foundation
for Cognitive Neuroscience,” Frontiers in neuroinformatics, vol. 5, p. 17,
Sep. 2011.

[27] J. A. Turner and A. R. Laird, “The cognitive paradigm ontology: design
and application,” Neuroinformatics, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 57–66, Jan. 2012.
[28] A. Lieto, F. Perrone, G. L. Pozzato, and E. Chiodino, “Beyond
subgoaling: A dynamic knowledge generation framework for creative
architectures,” Cognitive Systems
problem solving in cognitive
Research, vol. 58, pp. 305–316, Dec. 2019.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389041719304632

conceptual

commonsense

[29] A. Lieto and G. L. Pozzato, “A description logic framework
combination integrating typicality,
Journal of Experimental
pp.
vol.
eprint:
[Online]. Available:

for
probabilities
& Theoretical Artificial
769–804,
Sep.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2019.1672799.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2019.1672799

no.
publisher: Taylor & Francis

and cognitive heuristics,”
Intelligence,

2020,

32,

5,

[30] C. Masolo, S. Borgo, A. Gangemi, N. Guarino, and A. Oltramari,
Wonderweb deliverable d18: Ontology library. Technical report, ISTC-
CNR, 2003.

[31] G. Schraw, M. E. Dunkle, and L. D. Bendixen, “Cognitive processes
in well-defined and ill-defined problem solving,” Applied Cognitive
Psychology, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 523–538, 1995. [Online]. Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/acp.2350090605

[32] A. Kaplan and H. Flum, “Achievement goal orientations and identity
formation styles,” Educational Research Review, vol. 5, no. 1, pp.
50–67, Jan. 2010. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1747938X09000347

[33] J. J. Gibson, “The theory of affordances,” in Perceiving, acting, and
knowing: toward an ecological psychology, J. B. Robert E Shaw, Ed.
Hillsdale, N.J. : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977, pp. pp.67–82.
[Online]. Available: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00692033

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, PREPRINT

14

in creativity: educational

[53] A. Leroy, M. Romero, and L. Cassone, “Interactivity and materiality
the assessment of
for
Interactive Learning Environments, vol. 0,
eprint:
Jan.
[Online]. Available:

matter
divergent
no.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.1875005.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.1875005

thinking,”
1–12,
pp.

publisher: Routledge

robotics

2021,

0,

[54] L. Jamone, E. Ugur, A. Cangelosi, L. Fadiga, A. Bernardino, J. Piater,
and J. Santos-Victor, “Affordances
in Psychology, Neuroscience,
and Robotics: A Survey,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and
Developmental Systems, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 4–25, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7523298/

[55] R. Jung, B. Mead, J. Carrasco, and R. Flores, “The structure
of creative cognition in the human brain,” Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, vol. 7, p. 330, 2013.
[Online]. Available: https:
//www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00330

[56] L. Roux, M. Romero, F. Alexandre, T. Vi´eville, and C. Mercier,
“D´eveloppement d’une ontologie pour
l’analyse d’observables de
l’apprenant dans le contexte d’une tˆache avec des robots modulaires,”
Inria,
[Online]. Available: https://hal.inria.fr/
hal-03013685

report, Nov. 2020.

[57] K. M. Varadarajan and M. Vincze, “AfNet: The Affordance Network,”
in Computer Vision – ACCV 2012, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, K. M. Lee, Y. Matsushita, J. M. Rehg, and Z. Hu, Eds. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer, 2013, pp. 512–523.

[58] K. Janowicz and M. Compton, “The Stimulus-Sensor-Observation On-
tology Design Pattern and its Integration into the Semantic Sensor
Network Ontology,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Semantic Sensor Networks - Volume 668, ser. SSN’10. Aachen,
DEU: CEUR-WS.org, Nov. 2010, pp. 64–78.

[59] M. Musial and A. Tricot, Pr´ecis d’ing´enierie p´edagogique, 1st ed., ser.
PEDAGOGIES EN DEVELOPPEMENT. De Boeck Sup´erieur, Feb.
2020.

[60] F. Toyoshima, A. Barton, and O. Grenier, “Foundations for an Ontology
of Belief, Desire and Intention,” Formal Ontology in Information
Systems, pp. 140–154, 2020, publisher: IOS Press. [Online]. Available:
https://ebooks.iospress.nl/doi/10.3233/FAIA200667

[61] L. Asprino, A. G. Nuzzolese, A. Russo, A. Gangemi, V. Presutti,
and S. Nolfi, “An Ontology Design Pattern for supporting behaviour
arbitration in cognitive agents,” in Advances in Ontology Design and
Patterns, ser. Studies on the Semantic Web, 2017, vol. 32, no. Chapter
8, p. 10.

[62] M. Romero, F. Alexandre, T. Vi´eville, and G. Giraudon, “LINE-
Mn´emosyne : Des neurosciences computationnelles aux sciences de
l’´education computationnelles pour la mod´elisation du cerveau de
l’apprenant et du contexte de l’activit´e d’apprentissage,” Bulletin de
l’Association Franc¸aise pour l’Intelligence Artificielle, no. 108, Apr.
2020. [Online]. Available: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02541099

[34] M. Romero, T. Vieville,

and L. Heiser,

“Analyse d’activit´es
d’apprentissage m´ediatis´ees en robotique p´edagogique,” in Trait´e de
m´ethodologie de la recherche en Sciences de l’ ´Education et de la
Formation. B. Alberto and J.Thievenaz, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02957270

[35] B. Albero and J. Gu´erin, “L’int´erˆet pour l’activit´e en sciences de
l’´education. Vers une ´epist´emologie f´ed´eratrice ?” TransFormations
: Recherches en ´education et
formation des adultes, vol. 11, pp.
11–45, 2014, publisher: Institut CUEEP, Lille 1. [Online]. Available:
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01712411

[36] D. Allemang, J. Hendler, and F. Gandon, Semantic Web for the Working
Ontologist: Effective Modeling for Linked Data, RDFS, and OWL,
3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02939606

[37] T. Denœux, D. Dubois, and H. Prade, “Representations of Uncertainty
in AI: Beyond Probability and Possibility,” in A Guided Tour of
Artificial Intelligence Research: Volume I: Knowledge Representation,
Reasoning and Learning, P. Marquis, O. Papini, and H. Prade, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 119–150. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-06164-7 4

[38] C. Mercier, H. Chateau-Laurent, F. Alexandre, and T. Vi´eville, “On-
tology as neuronal-space manifold: towards symbolic and numerical
artificial embedding,” in KRHCAI-21@KR2021, Mar. 2021.

[39] N. Noy,

“Ontology Development 101: A Guide

Your First Ontology,” undefined, 2001. [Online]. Available:
Ontology-Development-101%3A-A-Guide-to-Creating-Your-Noy/
c15cf32df98969af5eaf85ae3098df6d2180b637

to Creating
/paper/

[40] M. Romero, “Analyzing Cognitive Flexibility in Older Adults Through
Playing with Robotic Cubes,” in Human Aspects of IT for the Aged
Population. Social Media, Games and Assistive Environments, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, J. Zhou and G. Salvendy, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 545–553.

[41] P. Dillenbourg and J. Self, “A Framework for Learner Modelling,”
Interactive Learning Environments, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 111–137, Jun.
1992. [Online]. Available: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
1049482920020202

[42] F. Alexandre, “Les relations difficiles entre l’Intelligence Artificielle
les Neurosciences,” Interstices, Aug. 2020. [Online]. Available:

et
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02925517

[43] N. Cowan, “What are the differences between long-term, short-term,
and working memory?” Progress in brain research, vol. 169, pp.
323–338, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC2657600/

[44] ——, “Sensory and Immediate Memory,” Encyclopedia of Conscious-

ness, Jan. 2010.

[45] H. Eichenbaum,

“Memory: Organization and Control,” Annual
Review of Psychology,
Jan.
2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/
annurev-psych-010416-044131

19–45,

vol.

no.

pp.

68,

1,

[46] F. Alexandre, “A global framework for a systemic view of brain
modeling,” Brain Informatics, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 3, Dec. 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://braininformatics.springeropen.com/articles/
10.1186/s40708-021-00126-4

[47] P. R. Pintrich, “Multiple goals, multiple pathways: The role of goal
orientation in learning and achievement,” Journal of Educational Psy-
chology, vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 544–555, 2000, place: US Publisher:
American Psychological Association.

[48] P. M. Poortvliet, “Mastery Goals,” Encyclopedia of Personality and

Individual Differences, pp. 1–4, 2016, publisher: Springer.

[49] G. H. Seijts and G. P. Latham, “Learning versus performance goals:
When should each be used?” Academy of Management Perspectives,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 124–131, 2005, publisher: Academy of Management
Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510.

[50] D. Ness and S. J. Farenga, Knowledge under construction: The impor-
tance of play in developing children’s spatial and geometric thinking, ser.
Knowledge under construction: The importance of play in developing
children’s spatial and geometric thinking. Lanham, MD, US: Rowman
& Littlefield, 2007, pages: xxiii, 257.

[51] G. Kalmpourtzis and M. Romero, “Artifactual Affordances in Playful
Robotics,” in International Conference on Games and Learning Alliance,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, I. Marfisi-Schottman, F. Bel-
lotti, L. Hamon, and R. Klemke, Eds. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2020, pp. 316–325.

[52] T. S. McNerney, “From turtles to Tangible Programming Bricks:
explorations in physical language design,” Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 326–337, Sep. 2004. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-004-0295-6

