A long journey into reproducible computational
neuroscience research
Meropi Topalidou, Arthur Leblois, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Meropi Topalidou, Arthur Leblois, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier. A long journey into repro-
ducible computational neuroscience research. Fourth International Symposium on Biology of Decision
Making (SBDM 2014), May 2014, Paris, France. ￿hal-01090648￿

HAL Id: hal-01090648

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01090648

Submitted on 3 Dec 2014

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

into

Original model from GUTHRIE eT Al.

Meropi Topalidou 1,2 - ARTHUR LEBLOIS 3 
Thomas boraud 1 - Nicolas Rougier 1,2

1 Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases - Université Victor Segalen - Bordeaux 2
 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 5293, Bordeaux
2 INRIA Bordeaux SUD-OUEST
3 LaboratorY OF NeurophysiCS AND PhysiologY Universite Paris Descartes
 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 8119, Paris

In a previous modeling study, Leblois et al. (2006) demonstrated an action selection 
mechanism in cortico-basal ganglia loops based on competition between the positive 
feedback, direct pathway through the striatum and the negative feedback, hyperdirect pathway 
through the subthalamic nucleus.

IN GUTHRIE ET AL. (2013), AUTHORS investigateD how multiple level action selection could be 
performed by the basal ganglia. To do this, the model is extended in a manner consistent with 
known anatomy and electro-physiology in three main areas. First, two-level decision making 
has been incorporated, with a cognitive level selecting based on cue shape and a motor level 
selecting based on cue position. We show that the decision made at the cognitive level can be 
used to bias the decision at the motor level. We then demonstrate that, for accurate 
transmission of information between decision-making levels, low excitability of striatal 
projection neurons is necessary, a generally observed electrophysiological finding. Second, 
instead of providing a biasing signal between cue choices as an external input to the network, 
we show that the action selection process can be driven by reasonable levels of noise. 
Finally, we incorporate dopamine modulated learning at corticostriatal synapses. As 
learning progresses, the action selection becomes based on learned visual cue values and is 
not interfered with by the noise that was necessary before learning.

However, the model was not reproducible from the article description...

use THe 
sources 
luke ! 

COgnitive and 
motor cortical 
decision

EXPERIMENT
 and
share...

...using 
ipython
notebook

github.com/rougier/Neurosciences

 Reproduction of the dynamic decision switch

If reproducibility is the hallmark of Science, non-reproducibility seems to 
be the hallmark of Computational Neurosciences. Guthrie et al. (2013) is a 
prototypic case of such non-reproducible computational neuroscience 
research even though the proposed model gives a fair account of decision 
making in the basal ganglia complex.

While trying to replicate results staRting from the article description, we 
soon realized some information were undisclosed, some other were 
ambiguous and there were also some factual errors. Even after accessing 
the original sources (6000 lines of pascal), we were still unable to 
understand how the model worked. In the end, only the original material (a 
windows executable) allowed us to access the missing information and 
After two months of intensive refactoring, we were finally able to 
replicate results using only 200 lines of python.

Unfortunately, such loose description is not an isolated case !!!

TO Be CONTINUED...

clean and non ambiguous figures

boring but 
incredibly 
useful !

DANA
rules !

Dana is a python framework for distributed, 
a s y n c h r o n o u s , n u m e r i c a l a n d a d a p t i v e 
computing. The computational paradigm 
supporting the dana framework is grounded 
on the notion of a unit that is a essentially 
a set of arbitrary values that can vary 
along time under the influence of other 
u n i t s a n d l e a r n i n g . E a c h u n i t c a n b e 
connected to any other unit (including 
itself) using a weighted link and a group is a 
structured set of such homogeneous units.

http://dana.loria.fr

Tabular description of the model 
from nordlie et al. (2009)

 
