Ontology as manifold: towards symbolic and numerical artificial
embedding Chloé Mercier, Frédéric Alexandre, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Chloé Mercier, Frédéric Alexandre, Thierry Viéville. Ontology as
manifold: towards symbolic and numerical artificial embedding. Workshop
on VSA and hyperdimensional computing - Winter 2022 session, Luleå
University of Technology, Sweden and UC Berkeley, USA, Jan 2022,
Virtual, Sweden. ￿hal-03550354￿

HAL Id: hal-03550354

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03550354

Submitted on 1 Feb 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Ontology as manifold: towards symbolic and numeric artificial embedding

Chloé Mercier, Frédéric Alexandre, Thierry Viéville

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

How to model human cognition with regard to…

Psychologically inspired symbolic reasoning

Biologically plausible spiking neural networks

We propose a geometric mapping of ontologies onto neuronal manifolds

RDF(S): Resource Description Framework (Schema) OWL: Web Ontology
Language

VSA: Vector Symbolic Architecture SPA: Semantic Pointer Architecture
NEF: Neural Engineering Framework

2

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Vector Symbolic Architecture

● Each symbol encoded as a vector sampled from the unit hypersphere ●
High-dimensional vector space => random vectors approximately orthogonal

v

The neural manifold hypothesis (Gallego et al, 2017)

3

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Vector Symbolic Architecture

● Each symbol encoded as a vector sampled from the unit hypersphere ●
High-dimensional vector space => random vectors approximately orthogonal
● Dot product as a similarity measure: compares the semantic meaning of
2 vectors.

4

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Vector Symbolic Architecture

● Each symbol encoded as a vector sampled from the unit hypersphere ●
High-dimensional vector space => random vectors approximately orthogonal
● Dot product as a similarity measure: compares the semantic meaning of
2 vectors.

Closed-world reasoning

Open-world reasoning

Anything that cannot be stated true is false

Anything might be true, unless proven false

𝜏 ∈ {0,1}

𝜏 ∈ {-1, 0, 1}

5

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Vector Symbolic Architecture

● Each symbol encoded as a vector sampled from the unit hypersphere ●
High-dimensional vector space => random vectors approximately orthogonal
● Dot product as a similarity measure: compares the semantic meaning of
2 vectors.

Closed-world reasoning

Open-world reasoning

Possibility theory

Anything that cannot be stated true is false

Anything might be true, unless proven false

Anything has a certain degree of possibility and necessity

𝜏 ∈ {0,1}

𝜏 ∈ {-1, 0, 1}

𝜏 ∈ [-1,1]

6

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Structuring the universe of discourse

● symbols: resources

○ ○ ○

classes (concepts) individuals (instances) properties (roles)

● facts: (weighted) triples

(subject, predicate, object), τ

7

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Structuring the universe of discourse

● symbols: resources

○ ○ ○

classes (concepts) individuals (instances) properties (roles)

● facts: (weighted) triples

(subject, predicate, object), τ

vectors

s p o

scalar

8

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

RDF/RDFS: Resource Description Framework (Schema)

● RDF: Resource Description Framework

➞ syntax: (subject, predicate, object) triples

● RDFS: RDF Schema

➞ metamodel of RDF, written in RDF ➞ allows to write (lightweight)
ontologies and draw inferences

9

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A triplestore using associative memories

10

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A Semantic Pointer triplestore

(subject, predicate, object), τ

vectors

s p o

scalar

key

value

s

τ 𝓑(o,p)

11

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A Semantic Pointer triplestore

(subject1, predicate1, object1), τ1

key

value

s1

τ1 𝓑(o1,p1)

12

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A Semantic Pointer triplestore

(subject1, predicate1, object1), τ1

(subject2, predicate2, object2), τ2

key

value

s1

s2

τ1 𝓑(o1,p1)

τ2 𝓑(o2,p2)

13

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A Semantic Pointer triplestore

(subject1, predicate1, object1), τ1

(subject2, predicate2, object2), τ2

(subject2, predicate3, object3), τ3

key

value

s1

s2

τ1 𝓑(o1,p1)

τ2 𝓑(o2,p2) + τ3 𝓑(o3,p3)

14

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A Semantic Pointer triplestore

(subject1, predicate1, object1), τ1

(subject2, predicate2, object2), τ2

(subject2, predicate3, object3), τ3

key

value

s1

s2

τ1 𝓑(o1,p1)

τ2 𝓑(o2,p2) + τ3 𝓑(o3,p3)

Need to introduce:

-   
-   
-   

scalar multiplication a = τ a vector superposition c = a + b vector
binding c = 𝓑(a,b)

⇨ Semantic Pointer Architecture (Eliasmith et al, 2013)

15

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A Semantic Pointer triplestore

(subject1, predicate1, object1), τ1

(subject2, predicate2, object2), τ2

(subject2, predicate3, object3), τ3

key

value

s1

s2

τ1 𝓑(o1,p1)

τ2 𝓑(o2,p2) + τ3 𝓑(o3,p3)

Need to introduce:

-   
-   
-   

scalar multiplication a = τ a vector superposition c = a + b vector
binding c = 𝓑(a,b)

⇨ Semantic Pointer Architecture (Eliasmith et al, 2013)

Vector-derived Transformation Binding (Gosmann and Eliasmith, 2019)

● ●

Square dimensionality d with d’² = d Binding operation defined as:

where

● ● ●

Non commutative, non associative Distributive and bilinear Admits right
identity and right inverse

16

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A Semantic Pointer triplestore

(subject1, predicate1, object1), τ1

(subject2, predicate2, object2), τ2

(subject2, predicate3, object3), τ3

key

value

s1

s2

τ1 𝓑(o1,p1)

τ2 𝓑(o2,p2) + τ3 𝓑(o3,p3)

Need to introduce:

-   
-   
-   

scalar multiplication a = τ a vector superposition c = a + b vector
binding c = 𝓑(a,b)

⇨ Semantic Pointer Architecture (Eliasmith et al, 2013)

NEF Associative Memory (Voelker et al, 2014)

yellow circles: passthrough nodes blue circles: neuron ensembles orange
connections: inhibitory green connections: modulatory

17

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

A Semantic Pointer triplestore

(subject1, predicate1, object1)

(subject2, predicate2, object2)

(subject2, predicate3, object3)

Need to introduce:

-   
-   
-   

scalar multiplication a = τ a vector superposition c = a + b vector
binding c = 𝓑(a,b)

⇨ Semantic Pointer Architecture (Eliasmith et al, 2013)

key

value

s1

s2

𝓑(o1,p1)

𝓑(o2,p2) + 𝓑(o3,p3)

NEF Associative Memory (Voelker et al, 2014)

yellow circles: passthrough nodes blue circles: neuron ensembles orange
connections: inhibitory green connections: modulatory

18

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Example of inference

Inheritance inference rule:

x rdf:type c & c rdfs:subClassOf c’ ⇒ x rdf:type c’

Ontology as Manifold

inspired by https://protege.stanford.edu/ ontologies/pizza/pizza.owl

19

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Example of inference

Inheritance inference rule:

x rdf:type c & c rdfs:subClassOf c’ ⇒ x rdf:type c’

Ontology as Manifold

inspired by https://protege.stanford.edu/ ontologies/pizza/pizza.owl

Sufficient condition:

𝐁type 𝐁subclass → 𝐁type

“inference rule” stored into a 2nd AM:

type ⊘ subclass → type

where x ⊘ y is such that Bx⊘y = Bx By

20

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

CUE 1: subject of interest

thisPizza

AM1: Facts

B(margherita, type)

Ontology as Manifold

21

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

CUE 1: subject of interest

thisPizza

CUE 2: predicate of interest

AM1: Facts

B(margherita, type)

unbinding

type

margherita

AM1: Facts

B(pizza, subClassOf)

B(B(pizza, subClassOf), type)

binding

22

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

CUE 1: subject of interest

thisPizza

CUE 2: predicate of interest

AM1: Facts

B(margherita, type)

unbinding

type

margherita

AM1: Facts

B(pizza, subClassOf)

B(B(pizza, subClassOf), type)

binding

CUE 3: rule to apply

type ⊘ subClassOf

AM2: Rules

type

unbinding

pizza

Inferred statement

B(pizza, type)

23

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

CUE 1: subject of interest

thisPizza

1

CUE 2: predicate of interest

type

CUE 3: rule to apply

type ⊘ subClassOf

unbinding

margherita

2

3

Ontology as Manifold

AM1: Facts

B(margherita, type)

AM1: Facts

B(pizza, subClassOf)

B(B(pizza, subClassOf), type)

binding

AM2: Rules

type

5

unbinding

4

pizza

Inferred statement

B(pizza, type)

6

24

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Simulation on Nengo

1

2

3

Plotted here are the input cue signals: accounting respectively for the
subject, the predicate and the rule to apply.

subject cue: THIS_PIZZA

predicate cue: TYPE

rule cue: TYPE ⊘ SUB_CLASS_OF

25

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Simulation on Nengo

4

5

6

Plotted here are the outputs given by the model: the object associated
to the given subject and predicate, the simplified predicate obtained
from the rule (subClass * type -> type, from the 2nd AM) and the final
statement inferred.

inferred object: PIZZA

inferred predicate: TYPE

inferred statement: THIS_PIZZA -> B(PIZZA, TYPE)

26

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Underlying mathematics

27

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Vector-derived Transformation Binding (VTB)

(Gosmann and Eliasmith, 2019)

● Square dimensionality d with d’² = d ● Binding operation defined as:

where

● Non commutative, non associative ● Distributive and bilinear

28

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

VT unbinding

(Gosmann and Eliasmith, 2019)

● VTB admits right approximate inverses:

○ the right approximate inverse y~ for y is such that:

○ By almost orthogonal:

=> just permute the elements of y to get y~

● Right identity vector iB such that

ie

29

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

VT unbinding

Check if a property is a predicate for a given resource and, if so,
retrieve the corresponding object:

-   Unbind p:

-   Check if the result belongs to the vocabulary: ? (if similarity is
    -1 < 𝜏 < 1, the statement is possible to some extent)

30

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

VT unbinding

What if want to check if two resources are linked to each other by a
predicate and, if so, retrieve the corresponding property (left
unbinding)?

We can flip the order of the operands using a well-chosen matrix :

=> Check if two resources are linked to each other by a predicate and,
if so, retrieve the corresponding property:

-   Flip the operands (multiply by )
-   Unbind y (multiply by the transpose of By)
-   Check if the result is semantically close to a word from the
    vocabulary (compute the dot product)

31

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

About the operator ⊘

We introduce a vector composition operator making explicit the
composition of two VTB operations, namely:

computable in

It commutes with the approximate inverse:(vérifier formulation)

where

32

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Towards more reasoning power

33

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Beyond the type inheritance inference

● Covering all RDFS entailments reduced to the rule schema developed
here, e.g.:

○ property inference (e.g., if Bob is the son of Ali then Bob is of the
same family

as Ali)

○ range inference (e.g., if Bob is the son of Ali, then Bob is a male) ○
domain inference (e.g., if Bob is the son of Ali, then Ali is a human)

etc…

● To what extent could it be applicable to description logics and OWL
entailment

rules?

● SWRL rules (i.e., inference rules expressed directly as rewriting
rules on variables)

stored in associative memories?

34

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

All RDFS entailments

●

Everything is a resource IF x p y THEN

○

■ ■

x rdf:type rdfs:Resource y rdf:type rdfs:Resource

●

Any class is a subclass of rdfs:Resource

○

IF c rdf:type rdfs:Class THEN

■

c rdfs:subClassOf rdfs:Resource

●

Type propagation

●

●

○ ○

IF c2 rdfs:subClassOf c1 AND x rdf:type c2

■ Subsumption reflexivity

THEN x rdf:type c1

○

IF c rdf:type rdfs:Class

■ Subsumption transitivity

THEN c rdfs:subClassOf c

○ ○

IF c2 rdfs:subClassOf c1 AND c3 rdfs:subClassOf c3

■

THEN c3 rdfs:subClassOf c1

●

Property propagation

○ ○

IF p2 rdfs:subPropertyOf p1 AND x p2 y

THEN x p1 y Property subsumption reflexivity

■

○

IF p rdf:type rdf:Property

■

THEN p rdfs:subPropertyOf p

Property subsumption transitivity

○ ○

IF p2 rdfs:subPropertyOf p1 AND p3 rdfs:subPropertyOf p2

■ Type inference (domain)

THEN p3 rdfs:subPropertyOf p1

○

IF p rdfs:domain d AND x p y

■ Type inference (range)

THEN x rdf:type d

○

IF p rdfs:range r AND x p y

■

THEN y rdf:type r

●

●

●

●

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Type inheritance

Ontology as Manifold

inspired by https://protege.stanford.edu/ ontologies/pizza/pizza.owl

x rdf:type c & c rdfs:subClassOf c’ ⇒ x rdf:type c’

Sufficient condition:

𝐁type 𝐁subclass → 𝐁type

“inference rule” stored into a 2nd AM:

type ⊘ subclass → type

where x ⊘ y is such that Bx⊘y = Bx By

36

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Subsumption transitivity

c rdfs:subClassOf c’ & c’ rdfs:subClassOf c’’ ⇒ c rdfs:subClassOf c’’

Stored in 2nd AM as:

subClassOf ⊘ subClassOf → subClassOf

37

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Domain and range inferences

p rdfs:domain c & x p y ⇒ x rdf:type c

p rdfs:range c & x p y ⇒ y rdf:type c

38

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Domain and range inferences

p rdfs:domain c & x p y ⇒ x rdf:type c

p rdfs:range c & x p y ⇒ y rdf:type c

We introduce an UNKNOWN vector (accounting for OWA) such that:

AM1

AM2

(same with range inference)

39

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Property propagation

p rdfs:subPropertyOf q & x p y ⇒ x q y

Using our previous architecture, this kind of inference is only possible
when

Is this consistent? Why not do the same for all “is_a” relationships
(subClassOf, type) ?… => ongoing work

40

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Gabriel’s internship: subproperty inference

would mean

Is this consistent? Why not do the same for all “is_a” relationships
(subClassOf, type) ?… => ongoing work (requires a slightly different
architecture)

41

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Property composition

Rules such as

eats ⊘ hasTopping → eats

to infer relational compositions

(not part of RDFS entailments, but similar to OWL property chains)

42

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

OWL: another representation for knowledge

Web Ontology Language

semantics based on description logics => fragment of 1st-order logic

more reasoning capabilities, computability and decidability under
constraints

A Practical Introduction to Protégé OWL

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

OWL + SWRL

SWRL: a Semantic Web Rule Language combining OWL and RuleML

Completes OWL with implication rules (written with variables, e.g. ?x):

hasParent(?x1,?x2) ∧ hasBrother(?x2,?x3)

⇒ hasUncle(?x1,?x3)

A Practical Introduction to Protégé OWL

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Alternate implementation: a compressed triplestore vector

45

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

An alternate implementation of entailment closure

All triplets are memorized in a store that is merely a sum of vectors:

allowing to enumerate all (subject, object) of a property, i.e., select
by predicate, also by predicate and subject or by predicate and object.

Given an entailment rule of the form:

where allows to consider approximate inference.

46

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Note that for an efficient retrieval, when storing triples, we can index
them either by subject, object or property:

(indexing triples by subject)

(indexing triples by property)

(indexing triples by object)

B is a bilinear form.

47

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

The class inheritance example:

Open (new) triple box

Enumerate the matched triples

Iterate on new triples

Closed (known) triple box

48

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

The class inheritance example:

-   

The rule corresponds to a hardwiring of a 2 input 1 output operator

-   Approximate equality (i.e. similarity)

is intrinsic to the calculus - Approximately true property is intrinsic
to the calculus The ‘&’ operator can be implemented as a product (but
not only).

-   

49

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

The class inheritance example:

-   

The rule corresponds to a hardwiring of a 2 input 1 output operator

-   Approximate equality (i.e. similarity)

is intrinsic to the calculus - Approximately true property is intrinsic
to the calculus The ‘&’ operator can be implemented as a product (but
not only).

-   
-   

For “negative” inferences (i.e. λ < 0) a different (symmetric) rule is
required :

50

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Accounting for uncertainty: possibility, necessity

51

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Linking with possibility π / necessity ν theory

A new interpretation of necessity and possibility as probability bounds

52

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Linking with possibility π / necessity ν theory

Given a set of a-priori knowledge and observation , (π,ν) is properly
defined as:

Given a possibility/necessity distribution (π,ν) we can define ● a
probability distribution of maximal entropy ● for “minimally corrected”
compatible distributions

53

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Linking with possibility π / necessity ν theory

Compatibility with Boolean and three-value logic calculus can be derived

Partially obtained by distribution monotonicity

Fully compatible in the “deterministic case” (vanilla theory) Requires
additional constraints in the 2D case for 0 or ± 1 values

In an open world (i.e. if we do not consider an exhaustive universe),
logical derivation related to the the complement of an event are not
possible.

The correct model underneath is modal logic.

54

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Linking with possibility π / necessity ν theory

In VSA (π, ν) could be implemented either as a pair of real numbers, or
as a complex number.

● Similarity can be defined as the dot product in the hermitian space

with the same interpretation

● VTB algebra and related operators seem generalizable

However there is no real “gain” to consider complex number apart from
using the complex product instead of matrix product.

55

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Conclusion/Perspectives

● Distributive, tightly coupled approach, drawing inspiration from
biology and psychology ●

2 associative memories:

○ ○

AM1 to store the ontological “facts” AM2 to store the inference rules =>
used to disclose implicit relationships/memberships

●

●

Alternate implementation: compressed triplestore (computing the
transitive closure)

Achievable inferences:

○

RDFS entailments:

■ ■

concept inclusion an inheritance property domains and ranges

○

extension to OWL ontologies: class complement, intersection, etc
Scalability, completeness, soundness on larger databases? + + How to
manage uncertainty? (possibility-necessity approach?) + How to update
the associative memory to add the inferred relationships? + How to learn
the inference rules from patterns discovered in AM1 ?

Nengo associative memory is read-only (though some work is aiming to
implement learning within AMs, cf Voelker et al 2014)

56

VSA ONLINE - Winter 2022

Ontology as Manifold

Thank you!

Special thanks to: Hugo Chateau-Laurent Théophane Valleys Gabriel
Doriath Döhler Terrence Stewart

References: Alexandre 2019; Allemang, Hendler, and Gandon 2020; Ayadi et
al. 2019; Bekolay et al. 2014; Choo 2018; Chui and Mhaskar 2018; Cohen,
Yang, and Mazaitis 2017; Crawford, Gingerich, and Eliasmith 2016;
Denœux, Dubois, and Prade 2020; Eidoon, Yazdani, and Oroumchian 2008;
Eliasmith 2013; Eliasmith and Anderson 2002; Eliasmith et al. 2012;
Gallego et al, 2017, Garcez and Lamb 2020; Gayler 2003; Gosmann 2018;
Gosmann and Eliasmith 2019; Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka 2014; Grosof et
al. 2003; Guo et al. 2016; Hohenecker and Lukasiewicz 2020; Horridge
2011; Horst 2005; Jiménez, Elizalde, and Raj 2018; Komer et al. 2019;
Lallement, Hilario, and Alexandre 1995; Levesque 1986; Levy and Gayler
2008; Mandler 2011; McClelland and Rogers 2003; Mercier et al. 2021;
Nallapu 2019; Petrucci, Ghidini, and Rospocher 2016; Phan et al. 2017;
Plate 1995; Pulvermüller 2013; Riegel et al. 2020; Romero, David, and
Lille 2019;Rusawuk 2018; Sajjad, Docherty, and Tyshetskiy 2019;
Sauerwald and Zanetti 2019; Schlegel, Neubert, and Protzel 2020; Shi et
al. 2020; Simpkin et al. 2018; Smith 1994; Stewart, Choo, and Eliasmith
2010; Stewart, Tang, and Eliasmith 2011; Sun and Alexandre 2013;
Tettamanzi, Zucker, and Gandon 2017; Tous and Delgado 2006; Voelker,
Crawford, and Eliasmith 2014; Wang, Qiu, and Wang 2021; Xiao, Huang, and
Zhu 2015; Zhu et al. 2017

57


