Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative
problem-solving with modular robotics
Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville. Multimodal learning analytics for studying cre-
[Research Report] RR-9467, Inria & Labri, Université
ative problem-solving with modular robotics.
Bordeaux. 2022, pp.27. ￿hal-03621919v4￿

HAL Id: hal-03621919

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03621919v4

Submitted on 31 Aug 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution - ShareAlike 4.0 International License

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular
robotics

3
Axel Palaude , Margarida Romero , Thierry Viéville
MNEMOSYNE

1

2

Research Report N° 9467 — March 2022 —27 pages.

Abstract: Creative problem solving is a complex process that is being studied through a diversity of
tasks. CreaCube is an open ill-deﬁned task whereby the player is required to engage in a creative
problem-solving activity (Romero et al., 2017) that we try to analyze with computational models
(Alexandre, 2020a). To represent the behavior of the subject through the activity evolution, we analyze the
activity through a coding schema considering the observables for this tangible problem solving activity.
Observables correspond to diﬀerent states of the artifact of behaviors of the participant at a given time.
In this study we introduce the learning analytic strategy corresponding to a temporal sequence of
observables. Through this sequence we aim to infer the participants’ internal state based on a diﬀerent
sequence of observables.
Through this study we aim to advance in the learning analytics strategy of a tangible problem-solving task
with educational robotics. Our main goal is to be able to both collect data more easily, avoiding as much
as possible the manual analysis of the video recording of the activity, and propose enriched observables.
To this end, we reﬁned the observables’ model as detailed in (Mercier et al., 2021) and added new
observables and decomposed existing ones into more speciﬁc ones based on the learner and task model.
We distinguished observables with automatable data collection and those which require manual
identiﬁcation.
In the end we discuss the relevance of this new version of CreaCube by discussing to what
extent it oﬀers additions to actual data analysis and ongoing research on this subject.

Key-words: creative problem-solving, learning analytics, educational robotics, data collection

1 Axel Palaude, Inria Mnemosyne Team, AIdE – axel.palaude@inria.fr

2 Margarida Romero, LINE, Université Côte d’Azur – margarida.romero@unice.fr

3 Thierry Viéville, Inria Mnemosyne Team, UCA LINE Laboratory, thierry.vieville@inria.fr

Analyse des données multimodales d’apprentissage pour l’étude de la résolution
créative de problèmes via une activité de robotique modulaire

Résumé : La résolution créative de problèmes est un processus complexe mis à l’étude via une grande variété
de tâches. CreaCube est une tâche ouverte et mal-déﬁnie par laquelle une personne est engagée dans une
activité de résolution créative de problème (Romero et al., 2017) que nous essayons de représenter et
d’analyser avec des modèles informatiques (Alexandre, 2020a). Aﬁn de représenter le comportement de la
personne engagée dans l’activité, nous analysons le déroulement de celle-ci à travers un codage comportant
diﬀérentes données nommées observables. Les observables correspondent aux diﬀérents états des artefacts
observables lors de l’activité (comportements, émotions, matériel) à un moment donné. Dans cette étude, nos
données d’apprentissage correspondent à des
séquences d’ensembles d'observables. Via ces séquences,
nous espérons pouvoir inférer l’état interne d’une personne engagée dans l’activité à partir de la séquence
d’observables lui étant associée.
Via cette étude, nous visons un approfondissement d’une stratégie d’analyse d’apprentissage pour CreaCube,
une tâche de résolution de problème tangible avec de la robotique éducative. Notre objectif principal est
d’être capable à la fois de collecter plus simplement et rapidement des données sur le déroulement de
l’activité, en évitant autant que possible le recours à l’analyse manuelle des enregistrements vidéo de l’activité,
et de proposer un nouveau cadre d’observables plus riche. Pour cela, nous proposons d’aﬃner le modèle des
observables détaillé dans (Mercier et al., 2021) et d’ajouter de nouvelles observables relatives à l’évolution de
la tâche extérieure à la personne engagée. Nous proposons également une distinction entre les observables
dont la collecte lors des expériences peut être automatisée et celles dont la collecte requiert une identiﬁcation
manuelle. Enﬁn, nous discutons de la pertinence et de la faisabilité de ces changements en réﬂéchissant à une
nouvelle version de CreaCube et ce qu’elle peut oﬀrir de plus aux analyses sur les données actuellement
menées sur le sujet.

Mots clés : résolution créative de problème, analyse de l’apprentissage, robotique éducative, collecte de
données

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 5

1.Introduction

1.1.The CreaCube task
1.2.Creative problem solving modeling
1.3.An observer model to collect data

2.Observables refinement

2.1.Constraints to let CreaCube remain the same
2.2.A new framework
2.3.Classification of observables

3.Discussion and future work

Bibliography

6
6
10
11

13
13
15
20

22

24

RR N° 9467

6

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

1.Introduction

CreaCube is a creative ill-defined problem-solving task (Romero et al., 2019). Through this task, the learner-player
is engaged in a problem-solving activity with almost no information but the final goal. The learner-player engages
in a process of creative problem-solving skills required both to engage in posing the problem, advancing through
the problem-solving process through different iterations of enactive interactions with the tangible material in order
to disambiguate the problem situation and advance through the interactive process of creating and evaluating an
artifact with four robotic cubes until they are assembled in a way that corresponds to the constraints of the task
goal. In this context, perception of technological affordances in the robotic cubes (Kalmpourtzis & Romero, 2020)
and their relation to prior knowledge and the strategies to explore and acquire new insights from interactions with
the unknown material (Romero et al., 2018) are required to advance in the knowledge constructions which will
allow the learner-player to solve the CreaCube ill-defined task.

1.1.The CreaCube task

Description of the task The CreaCube task setup consists of four different modular cubelets (red, white, blue and
black) presented on a table (with a black point and a red point on it) in front of the player. The instructions,
repeatable at will through a push button, consist in one sentence : « You need to build a vehicle composed of 4
pieces that moves autonomously from the red point to the black point. You can listen to the instructions again by
clicking again on the button. ». A configuration of this activity is shown in Figure 1. The activity is not limited in time
(but the player can decide to stop the activity at any moment) and no help is given to the player by any means.
The activity is developed twice. The first occurrence of the activity has an average duration of 173 seconds
(sd=224 seconds) and the second occurrence of the activity has an average duration of 62 seconds (sd=79
seconds) based on the analysis of 425 participants.

Figure 1 : An example of configuration of CreaCube. The four cubes must be assembled in order to make them
move autonomously from the red point to the black point

Hardware description Each cube is a modular robotic component named Cubelet and has different technological
affordances and are enacted into different functional behavior during the activity depending on the way the cubes
are assembled. We describe below each of the cubes :

4

-The white cube has 5 magnetic faces that are used to connect it with other cubes, and one face with two
wheels. As we want to determine when the player sees the wheels for the first time (see next section for

4 https://modrobotics.com/

Inria

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 7

more details), the wheels are hidden from the player’s vision in the beginning. The wheels do not move by
default, they must be “activated”.
-The blue cube has 5 magnetic faces, and one face with two elements : a switch “O/I” and a plug. The
switch must be turned “on” to supply electricity to other cubes. The plug can be used to refill the cube, and
is not relevant during the activity.
-The black cube has 5 magnetic faces and one face with two “eyes” that hide a directional infrared
distance captor that can detect obstacles in the direction of the face and send a signal to other cubes
depending on the measured distance
-The red cube has 6 magnetic faces with no specific visible technological affordances. Depending on its
position, the inverter cube changes the behavior of the structure depending on where it is situated, acting
more or less as an approximate “inverter” of the signal sent by the black cube.

The general configuration of a goal structure (i.e. a structure that can move autonomously from the red point to the
black point) consists of a balanced structure of the four cubes connected together with the magnetic faces, with
the wheels on the table to allow movement and the switch on the “on” position. Depending on where and in which
direction the black and red cubes are placed, the structure can have a lot of different types of movement : linear,
accelerating, no movement at all etc.

Context of the study The protocol developed within the ANR CreaMaker with the CreaCube task aims to study
computational
thinking through a creative problem solving task (Romero, 2017; Romero et al., 2019) The
CreaCube activity can solicit most of them. For instance, the activity can be solved by one or more participants
(Romero et al., 2021). CreaCube is a creative problem solving task engaging computational
thinking
competencies.

thinking (CT)
Computational Thinking components Romero et al.
competency as “a coherent set of cognitive and metacognitive strategies engaged in (complex) systems
identification, representation, programming, and evaluation” and consider six different components. Barnabé et al.
(2020) applied those components to the CreaCube activity as shown in figure 2 to represent solicited CT
competency and its components during this problem-solving activity.

(2017) describe the computational

Figure 2. CT components in relation to the computational framework as developed in (Romero et al., 2017) by
(Barnabé et al., 2020).

Problem-solving There are different approaches when tackling problem-solving study.
From an information processing theory of human reasoning, (Newell, 1981) defines a problem space as the
"fundamental organizational unit of all human goal oriented symbolic activity” (p.696) and a problem as “a set of
initial states, a set of goal states, and a set of path constraints.The problem is to find a path through the space that

RR N° 9467

8

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

starts at any initial state, passes only along paths that satisfy the path constraints, and ends at any goal state” (p.
695). In this model, we can consider a problem-space as an automata with a problem-solving process as a word:
-Initial state(s) and final state(s) correspond to the beginning and the goal states of the problem;
-States correspond to each possible state of the problem
-Transitions from one state to another correspond to a transformative action modifying the problem state

from one configuration to another.
The CreaCube task can be decomposed in different states representing all possible configurations of the four
cubes, the initial state being the four disconnected cubes and the final states being every structure that allows the
resolution of the task by being able to move autonomously and reach the target point. Operators are represented
by actions taken by the subject, such as “connecting the white cube to the blue cube”.

From a socio-cultural perspective, within a PISA framework for instance (OECD 2013), problem-solving is modeled
linear nor sequential, especially for complex
that are nor
as a process including four different stages,
problem-solving requiring subdivisions of the problem space:

-exploring and understanding the problem to identify the components of a situation and their structure;
-representing and formulating the problem to organize and model the situation efficiently;
-planning and executing the problem to engage in the solution creation;
-monitoring and reflecting the problem to engage in the solution evaluation and improvement.

Prior knowledge can allow a better identification of the problem and the use of relevant knowledge to solve it.
Wiley (1998) determined that having a certain domain knowledge can “act as a mental set, promoting fixation in
creative problem-solving attempts”. Non-relevant prior-knowledge should be inhibited to avoid fixations to early
ideas or the use of inappropriate knowledge for the task.
The development of problem-solving competencies can change the way the problems are tackled, allowing for
instance the inhibition of non-relevant knowledge and the generation of novel ideas to reach the goal. As such, the
development of these competencies modify the way the different phases are tackled. For instance, Brand-Gruwel
et al. (2005) observe that expert problem solvers engage more time in the analysis of the problem and are better
at regulating the problem-solving process than novice problem-solvers.
CreaCube is an ill-defined problem. Greenwald (2000) defines ill-defined problems as being “unclear and raises
questions about what is known, what needs to be known, and how the answer can be found. Because the problem
is unclear,
there are many ways to solve it, and the solutions are influenced by one's vantage point and
experience”.
As such, the task cannot be solved with an initial phase of exploration, and the subject is not aware of any prior
routine or algorithm to solve it.

Creativity While some primary teachers consider creativity to be specially related to the arts (Capron Puozzo,
2016), research on creativity is considered as a transversal competency and is present even in STEM disciplines.
Creativity has already been studied in education science (Leroy et al., 2021), and in many other disciplines of
interest such as cognitive neuroscience (Alexandre, 2020b), computational science (Oltețeanu, 2020), but also
philosophy (Gaut, 2010). Here we consider creativity for the CreaCube activity as an individual process that aims
to design a solution that is both novel and appropriate in regard to the subject and the task.

Techno-creative computational thinking As illustrated by Figure 3, creativity, problem-solving and computational
thinking skills are intersecting with each other. Creativity can be considered as a process engaged in
decision-making and in problem-solving competency (Romero et al., 2022). On one hand, computational thinking
can be solicited for problem-solving activity in which computer science knowledge is engaged. On the other hand,
Jacob and Warschauer
thinking
competency. Finally, creativity and computational thinking can intersect when the computational situation allows a
margin of creativity to decide the final chosen method, system or solution.

(2018) consider problem-solving as a process within the computational

Inria

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 9

Figure 3 : Techno-creative computational
computational thinking (Romero et al., 2022).

thinking as the intersection of creativity, problem solving and

The CreaCube activity is soliciting computational thinking competencies as mentioned in Figure 2, and is an
ill-defined problem-solving activity. As such, the activity is more likely to solicit creativity skills, as there is no known
method to solve the problem. As such, the CreaCube activity fits into the techno-creative computational thinking
category.

To sum up, the CreaCube activity, by design, is an ill-defined problem-solving activity soliciting computational
thinking skills. The learner-subject, by manipulating the different cubes without prior knowledge of their role or the
resolution method, adopts different behaviors engaging the aforementioned skills. In order to study these different
competencies and the way each learner solicits them, we need now to model the subject and its behavior
in order to be able to connect our models.

1.2.Creative problem solving modeling

the limits of behavioral

to better understand the creative problem-solving process we consider

In order
observations in limited samples
First, indirect measures like surveys and questionnaires are typically easy-to-apply, and low-cost tools, while
allowing an alternative to assess issues difficult to identify by observation. However, they are potentially misleading
(Gris & Bengtson, 2021), as they are coming from subjects who potentially add more biases (lying, agreeing,
responding in a socially desirable fashion, etc.).
Direct measures are more complex and time-consuming, as it implies, for instance, to identify what is to be
measured, or determine what are appropriate data-recording procedures. They are more precise, but they are
limited in application. For instance, identifying a behavior may require a lot of different direct measures.
In any case, the observation of the subject’s behavior is an important issue to take into account.
For the CreaCube activity, an observation model is used to represent its evolution in relation to the player.

1.3.An observer model to collect data

Our main goal is to represent the evolution of the mental state of the player during this creative problem-solving
task: what are the player goals and beliefs, what the player learns, how the player behaves etc.
However, we do not have direct access to the evolution of the internal state of the subject during the activity, but
rather to external cues.

RR N° 9467

10

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

An observer’s role during an experiment is to describe the external state of the experiment: how the experiment
changes over time, what are the subject’s actions etc. The observer can collect any accessible (e.g. visible) data
about the experiment.
We do model the observer by what variables the observer is collecting during the experiment. We call these
variables observables.
A set of observables at a given time corresponds to a representation of the experimental state at this given time.
As observables may change over time, the evolution of a set of observables corresponds to the representation of
the evolution of the experimental state over time.
In order to represent the evolution of the CreaCube experiment, we will use an observer model composed of
different in-task observables as detailed by Mercier et al. (2022).

In-task observables (Mercier et al., 2022) detailed in-tasks observables about the activity. As shown in Figure 3,
there are different types of observables :

F\*\* and AS\*\* correspond respectively to complete and partial structures of the cubes;
U\*\* correspond to what the user is doing physically while B\*\* and E\*\* correspond to the mental state of

the user representing respectively behaviors and emotions of the subject;

A\*\* correspond to visual affordance and if they are discovered by the subject
T\*\* correspond to discrete categorisation of the experimental states;
S01 and S02 correspond to the state of the switch
P\*\* correspond to the different problems related to a structure stopping it from a “goal” configuration.
FL\*\* correspond to changes made by the subject on a cube when the subject tries the same configuration

(either the cube is rotated or not).

Figure 4 : Observables of the CreaCube activity by (Mercier et al., 2022).

They are recorded with the precise instant of occurrence, with an offline measure with a video recording of
the experiment. In this paradigm, either a human observer or a machine learning algorithm may identify the in
real-time experimental state.

Inria

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 11

Observables are completed with surveys before and after the activity filled by participants. The pre-activity
survey contains questions about the subject (age, familiarity with technology etc.) and the after-activity survey
contains questions about what the subject did during the activity (e.g. “Did you tried to solve the task the fastest
possible way ?”) and what he did learn about the cubes (e.g. “Can you describe the role and features of the white
cube?). Also, participants are aware of the experiment, so they know what is recorded.

Data and data collection limits We are convinced that some observables have some flaws :

-Some observables lack precision : AS\*\* observables take into account the general configuration, but the
color of connected cubes may be relevant. As we saw earlier, the black-blue-white structure is able to move
autonomously, which is not the case for other 3-cubes configurations. For the subject, the reaction to the 3-cube
structure may not be the same if the structure can move or not. U\*\* observables are not able to distinguish a
“Hands up with two connected cubes” from a “Hands up with two disjoint cubes”, which seems to be relevant to
determine the subject’s actual action.

-Behaviors’ observables seem to be overlapping (e.g. B02 and B03) while not being enough to represent

all behaviors relevant to the task.
We are also convinced that the method to collect observables is not optimal. First, the identification of observables
by a human-observer does not seem to be very efficient in terms of time resources. Even trying to train a
machine-learning algorithm requires a prior data set that is time-consuming to create.
Our main goal in this report is to propose some corrections to the data collection by proposing a new framework of
observables without changing the means of the CreaCube task.

2.Observables refinement

In order to make the model more precise, we will try both to complete the observables currently used and to refine
the coding of the observables already detailed in (Mercier et al., 2022), i.e. the learning traces. At the experimental
level, the main challenge is to reliably collect a large amount of data. For this, we will give a classification of
observables based on the separation between observables whose identification is manual (identified by a human
observer) and those whose identification can or could be automated. We will also add new automatable
observables in order to refine what can be taken into account with those already existing. However, the activity
should remain the same, and adding elements to observe on the activity may change the way the subject tackles
it.
To dodge this kind of problem, we will first address problems to take into account before transforming the
observables framework. Then we will present a classification of existing observables, in order to present a new
observables framework in a third part.

2.1.Constraints to let CreaCube remain the same

Our main constraint is that the CreaCube activity must remain the same. To be more precise:

(C) Changes made to the activity should not change the behavior of the subject towards the activity.

We want to keep the compatibility with existing work on the CreaCube activity. For instance, if we add a visible
physical element to the cubes in order to collect new observables, it will become a neutral or negative affordance.
Either way, a new affordance may imply new ways of thinking from the subject of the activity, thus changing current
learning representation models of the subject.
This constraint can be decomposed in more precise ones that we need to discuss.

Visible external sensors When people are aware of being observed, their behavior may change, and they can
distort both what they do and what they say (Kazdin, 1982). Even when the observer is actually a video camera,
people distort their behaviors. (Constantinou et al., 2005) showed that the presence of a video camera impacts
task performance. The original activity records only the subject’s hands, and even if it already affects the subject’s
behavior, we will try to avoid adding another bias by adding other external sensors like video cameras.

(C1) Visible sensors added for data collection should not change the behavior of the subject towards the
activity.

RR N° 9467

12

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

Filming the subject is one example of the (C1) constraint not respected, but it is not the only one.
For instance, we think that the posture of the subject towards the activity may be a good indicator for behavioral
and emotional observables. A subject slumped in his chair may be less likely to be in an active trial/error behavior,
and more likely to feel boredom. However, as it implies to be able to record movements of the body during the
activity, either with a camera or sensors directly on the subject, we consider that it does not fulfill (C1) and thus will
not be added in the framework detailed in the next section.

An objection to this constraint is that the subject may get accustomed to sensors even on the subject’s body, in a
way that the subject forgets the existence of the sensors. This way, we could suppress the (C1) constraint. We did
not explore this possibility here, but we will discuss this possibility later in the article.

Invisible sensors We could argue that if (C1) does not allow adding visible sensors because it may change
behaviors, a way to get around the problem is to add non visible sensors. For instance, we could add a camera to
film the subject without
the subject must be aware of the
measurements before the beginning of the activity for consent reasons. If the subject is aware of a camera’s
presence somewhere around, the subject’s behavior may be changed the same way as if there were visible
cameras. We change the constraint (C1) to take the subject’s awareness about measurements into account:

the subject knowing. However,

is stated that

it

(C1) Sensors either visible or not, added for data collection, should not change the behavior of the subject
towards the activity.

Visible internal modifications By visible internal modifications, we are talking about sensors that are situated on
the activity, either on cubes or on the table, or complete changes of the activity. An extreme example would be the
addition of a fifth cube, completely changing the dynamics of the activity, but little changes may be impactful too:
adding a visible sensor on the table or cubes may add a new affordance to take into account. That leads to a
second constraint :

(C2) No visual modification should be done on the activity, because it may change the way the subject
learns or acts.

This constraint implies that we should not change the appearance of the activity because the actual appearance of
it already has a specific meaning, and specific set of possible physical manipulations.
Meaning-wise, the general appearance of an activity is important because it has a specific meaning (that may be
different for each subject as it depends on culture and previous experiences): different colors and shapes have
different meanings. So it appears that changing the color of one cube for instance does not respect (C2), because
the semantic of each color is distinct, so a new color may change the hypothesis formulated by the subject. For
instance, if all cubes are black, a possible assumption to make is that they are identical.
Manipulation-wise, changing the possible manipulations of the cubes may change the way the subject tackles the
activity. Comparing two cubes is more difficult if the subject cannot take them both in hands for example, so the
subject may be encouraged by this constraint to adopt other behaviors.
For instance, changing the size of the cubes may be beneficial for us : bigger cubes may contain more internal
sensors or have more space onto the faces of the cubes to have bigger affordances that could be easier to detect.
However, even if the meaning remained the same, bigger cubes may imply that the subject cannot have the four
cubes in hand at the same time, thus preventing the subject from doing the same manipulations as the original
activity. This constraint applies also for modifications not related to cubes. If we decide to put the cubes in a box
instead of on a table (in order to film manipulations from all angles for example), the subject’s arms movements
will be limited, thus changing once again the manipulations done in comparison to the original activity.

Now that the constraints are determined, we then create a new framework of observables that is more precise
while respecting the constraints.

Inria

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 13

2.2.A new framework

The first step to create a more precise set of observables is to refine existing ones, preferably without changing
anything to the activity for the moment.
In order to do this refinement, we need to identify which observables are lacking precision and decide which ones
are refinable given our constraints. For this, we will take a look at each category of observables, one by one.

instance, we will consider

Final structures. For each final structure shape, there are a lot of different configurations, depending on the
position of each cube and where specific cube faces are situated (mostly wheels and eyes).
For
the structure F000, where all cubes are aligned. There are 24 different
configurations, some of them are detailed in Figure 4. For each configuration, the wheels may touch the ground or
not, and sensors can see obstacles (if directed to the bottom where the table is) or not (if placed in front of the line
for instance). For each configuration, goal structures can exist but are not systematic (depending on the orientation
of the wheels for instance). This classification is already done by Mercier et al. (2022)

Figure 4 : 12 configurations for the F000 structure detailed by (Mercier et al., 2022).The configuration is coded by
four letters S (sensors), W (wheels), B (Battery) and I (inverter), and the letter T (or F) indicates if the structure can
be a goal-structure, depending on the orientation of the wheels and the sensor, and if the switch is turned on.

Partial structures. Partial structures observables indicate how many cubes are connected with each other when
not being on a final structure : none (AS00), two (AS01), three (AS02) and four but with two unconnected pairs
(AS03). We propose two improvements to this classification.
First, we consider the shapes of partial structures. As soon as three cubes are connected, the shape can either be
a line or a bend. This separates AS03 into AS03-L (lined shape) and AS03-B (bended shape).
Second, we consider which cubes are connected to each other:

-AS00 does not change;
-There are 6 different possible pairs for AS01. To code each cube, we use an initial letter : I (Inverter, red
cube), W (Wheels, white cube), B (Battery, blue cube) and S (Sensors, black cube). When coding pairs (as there is
no order), we will code a pair by two letters. AS01 is decomposed in AS01-IW, AS01-IB, AS01-IS, AS01-WB,
AS01-WS and AS01-BS;

-There are 3 different possible pairs of pairs for AS03, as there is no order between pairs and there is no
order in each pair because there is no spatial information about the partial structure. AS03 is decomposed in
AS03-IW-BS, AS03-IB-WS and AS03-IS-WB;

-There are 12 possible 3-cube structures for AS02, as we distinguish the middle cube from other ones.
Given the separation of AS02 depending on shape, that gives 24 possible 3-cube structures in total. We encode
those by putting the middle cube in the middle of the coding. For example, bended shapes are encoded
AS02-B-IWB, AS02-B-IWS, AS02-B-BWS, AS02-B-WIB, AS02-B-WIS AS02-B-BIS, AS02-B-IBW, AS02-B-IBS,
AS02-B-WBS, AS02-B-ISW, AS02-B-ISB and AS02-B-WSB
In the end, instead of 4 observables, we have a total of 34 different observables for partial structures.

We could differentiate structures (either partial or complete) to be more precise depending on the orientation of
each cube. In particular, faces with specific elements such as wheels or sensors are important to differentiate
because their orientation changes the movement of the structure (e.g. wheels not touching the ground cannot

RR N° 9467

14

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

make the structure move). However, the observation of the orientation of each cube during the activity given
existing data may be difficult depending on the hand movement (e.g. moving a cube in hand to observe it with the
hand blocking the camera’s gaze).

Switch As the switch can only have two configurations, we do not need to add new observables to this category.
However, we replaced B01 and B02 by S01 and S02 (for switch) as it was redundant with behavioral observables.

Affordances. Affordances are determined by an element from the cubes that suggest an action. Affordances
the affordance suggests the action. From the original activity, 5
observables correspond to the moment
observables where determined :
-Wheels from the white cube that suggest movement
-Magnets from all cubes that suggest connection
-The switch from the battery cube that suggests its pushing
-The “eyes” from the sensor cube that suggest the vision of the cube (i.e. sensors)
-The sensors from the sensor cube suggest the placement of the cube in the structure.
As we are not able to determine all affordances exactly, we will not change this category.

Emotions Emotional observables are based on a specific model of emotion representation using the wheel
developed by (Plutchik, 1980). The model, available Figure W, consists of 8 main types of emotions that are
divided into subcategories. Actual observables differentiate only main categories for a total of 8 observables. A
possible refinement of this model would be to consider separately the different emotions that are represented
together in the actual model, like joy and serenity for instance.

Figure 5 : Emotions’ wheel described in (Plutchik, 1980).

Inria

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 15

Behaviors There are different models representing problem-solving strategies. For instance, (Missier & Fum,
2002) consider “two main classes of problem solving strategies (memory-based vs rule-based)”, but we can make
other distinctions between strategies, depending on formal education, type of problem etc. The general model
considered at the moment for the CreaCube activity consists of five strategies considered as behaviors of the
subject regarding the activity :

-Trial/error : the subject tries different configurations, most of them do not work, so the subject adapt the

structure to achieve a goal (e.g. making a sub-structure consisting of the black, blue and white cubes move)

-Analytical/systemic : the subject analyzes the system and tries to understand how the system (or a
subsystem) of the activity works (e.g. watching the white cube, and concluding that because there are wheels, the
structure may move thanks to it).

-Hypothesizing :

the system or the subsystem or changes
pre-existing ones to achieve a good level of understanding the system (e.g. making the hypothesis that the white
cube moves forward when moved backwards by the subject, or contradicting this hypothesis when tested)

the subject makes hypotheses about

-Ego preservation and complaining : even if those behaviors may not be active towards the resolution of
the problem, we could consider them as (unsuccessful) strategies regarding the activity. For instance, a subject
complaining to an experimenter may hope that the experimenter will give the solution or a hint.

As this category depends on a chosen model of behaviors and strategies, we cannot refine it without

changing the entire behavior model, so we will not change it in this report.
However, there are different

However, we will discuss later how our refinement of observables could lead to a new model of behavior

with different techniques such as clustering.

Problems Actual problem observables were determined by looking at the existing data and manually classifying
non-winning structures . As such, we are not capable of producing something as exhaustive as every combination
of goal structures for instance, so we decided not to change anything to these categories. It could be however the
subject of a future work.

Experimental states T\*\* observables indicate states of the experiment. It goes from T01 to T02 or T03 depending
on the end of the experiment, which can be an abandon (T02) or a success (T03). As there are only those two
possibilities, we leave this category unchanged.

Cube repositioning FL\*\* observables indicate a repositioning of a cube in a structure, without changing its place
in the structure : either the cube’s orientation is changed (the cube is rotated but remains at the same place in the
configuration) or the cube is repositioned exactly the same way (the manipulation did not change the structure at
all).
Changes in cubes orientation are of one of those two types, but the modification to the structure may change the
coding of final structures (going from a “goal”-configuration to a configuration with one or more problems and vice
versa)

User-related manipulations U\*\* observables are related to manipulations done by the subject. These
manipulations are related either to the instructions (U01 and U02 corresponding respectively to playing and stop
playing instructions) or the cubes, giving indications about how many cubes are manipulated. By assembling
partial structure observables and user-related manipulations, we think that we could have all necessary
information to reconstruct the scene of manipulation at a given moment. However, this is contradicted by the actual
model for two reasons :

-When it comes to 2 cubes in hand and a partial structure with two connected cubes and two
disconnected cubes, we are not able to identify if cubes in hand are connected or not connected. Making the
distinction is interesting for behavior identification reasons : the subject may not have two connected cubes and
two disconnected cubes for the same reason. For instance, with two disconnected cubes, the subject may be
looking at them one by one, which is not possible if they are connected.
To resolve this problem, we separate the U05 into two observables, because it is the only one which has this
problem (1 cube is necessary disconnected, 3 and four cubes are entirely identified by the partial structures),
namely U05-C (connected) and U05-D (Disconnected)

RR N° 9467

16

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

-When it comes to partial structures with same-size elements, we are not able to distinguish which
element is in hand and which element is not. For instance, if we take the partial structure AS00 with no connection
between cubes, if the user has two cubes in hand, we are not able to determine which ones are in hand.
To resolve this problem, we could refine again partial structure to have a specific order and consider, for instance,
that U\*\* observables consider the first one, two or three cubes in hand (for instance, AS01-IW could be separated
into AS01-IW and AS01-BS and if 2 cubes are in hand, those cubes are necessarily IW for the first one and BS for
the second one). Another solution could be the color specification of cubes for each cube in hand. As it will be a
very tedious solution, we instead propose a new class of observables named handled.

Handled cubes In order to know which cubes are in hand at a given time, we add the class of observables
handled. There are 4 H\*\* observables, one for each cube, indicating if the cube is handled or not by the subject:

-HW : “The white cube (wheels) is in hand”;
-HI : “The red cube (inverter) is in hand”;
-HB: “The blue cube (Battery) is in hand”;
-HS: “The black cube (Sensors) is in hand”.

We note that these observables may be used to determine some U\*\* observables, as the number of verified H\*\*
observables correspond to the number of cubes in hand. For instance, if only H01 is verified, it implies that we are
in the configuration U04 “Hands up with 1 cube”.
With the refined partial structure observables detailed previously, we are also capable of identifying if the cubes in
hand are connected or not without adding new observables. For instance, if we are in the configuration AS01-BS,
H01 and H02, not only we are in the configuration U05: we are more precisely in the configuration U05-D because
the connected cubes of the partial configuration are black and blue and the handled cubes are white and red.

Conclusion To sum up added observables, Table 1 sums up all additions and modifications made to the
observables framework.
It appears that changes made here do not concern the analysis of the subject but rather the analysis of cubes.
With the actual camera filming only cubes and hands, new observables may be identified (except maybe the green
light affordance, see the Discussion section), even with already filmed experiments. This way, new observables do
not break previously established constraints, as no sensor is added (so (C1’) is valid) and no changes are done on
the activity (so (C2) is valid).
The new framework appears to be more precise. However, a precise framework may not be useful. To justify the
relevance of this refinement, we need to explain how the new framework is useful to either collect more precise
data and analyze it.
The collection of more precise data comes from the non-suppression of any existing observables: the entire set of
observables collected from previous experiments with the previous framework is included onto the new one. As
such, we can guarantee that the new framework is at least as precise as the previous one.

In order to discuss contributions of the new framework to data analysis, we will then classify observables from the
framework into two categories (“device-related” and “subject-related”), and suggest how the easy collection of the
first category will help the analysis of the second one.

Inria

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 17

Category

Name

Statues

Coding

Number

Refinement

F

AS

S

AF

E

B

U

P

H

FL

T

Figures

Untouched

(Mercier et al.,
2022)

(Mercier
al., 2022)

et

Partial Structures (0,
2
cubes
3
or
connected)

Extended

\*\*-cccc(-S/B)

34

Switch

Untouched

Affordances

Untouched

Emotions

Behaviors

Untouched

Untouched

\*\*

\*\*

\*\*

\*\*

User manipulations

Extended

\*\*(-C/D)

Problems

Untouched

Handled cubes

Added

Repositioning
cube

of

a

Untouched

Experimental state

Untouched

\*\*

\*\*

\*\*

\*\*

2

5

8

5

8

6

4

2

3

Which
connected,
form a bend or a line?

cubes
do

are
they

U05 : connected pair or
not?

Is a cube handled?

Table 1: Summary of modifications of the observables framework. c-letters stand for the cube ID (depending on its
role, W, B, I or S) and \*\* stand for numbers.

2.3.Classification of observables

We decided to classify observables from the new framework in two distinct categories: subject-related and
Device-related.

Device-related observables Device-related observables are observables that do not take into account the
internal state of the subject to be determined. They can be identified by sensors or a manual identification pointed
only on cubes. It corresponds to the evolution of the cubes and the general structure. As such, this category
contains Partial structure observables AS, Final structures observables F, Switch-state observables S, but also
Handled observables H and User-related observables U and experimental states T, because they do not require
assumption about the player's internal state but rather the physical actions taken, such as pressing the button to
play instructions, having one cube in hand, or succeeding to the activity.
As these observables cannot be subject to interpretation (they are the most precise direct measures we have), we
think that it is possible to automate the collection of device-related observables. We will discuss in the next section
what are the solutions we think of to begin with.
Also, even if we think that it is rather inefficient, the current method of data collection is enough to properly collect
these observables, and past experiments videos are compatible with the collection of device-related observables
from our new framework.

Subject-related observables Subject-related observables are observables that require assumptions by the
observer, either the internal state of the subject or the state of the activity to be determined. It corresponds to the
player's emotion observables E\*\*, the behavior observables B\*\*, but we also consider problem observables P\*\*
(because the identification of the problem comes from the observer) and affordance observables AF\*\* (because
even if affordances are situated on the device, the observables correspond to their identification by the subject,
thus requiring an assumption of changes at an internal state level).

RR N° 9467

18

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

Manipulation reconstitution A set of observables is collected at a given time (at a given time t, we collect the
activity state for device-related observables and the player’s internal state for subject-related observables). With a
given sampling, we are able to describe an experiment by the succession of sets of observables (t0, t1, t2 etc.). As
such, we may be able to reconstitute the entire physical manipulation done by a subject if the sampling step is low
enough, such as the evolution of the subject’s internal state during the activity.
However, it is more difficult to determine the player’s internal state than the physical state of the experiment during
the activity. We did the distinction between device-related and subject-related observables because we think that
the first may help the collection of the others in two possible ways :
-First, with manual collection of subject-related observables, we may be able to train a machine learning algorithm
capable of inducing the subject-related observables from device-related observables. As an example, consider
that the successive grabbing of each cube is classified by human observers as an “Analytical/System” observable
(B02). The succession of “No cube in hand” (U03) and “One cube in hand” (U04), and the succession of the four
different Handled observables H may imply that the subject is having an “Analytical/System” behavior, without
having access to any subject-related observable.
-Second, from the identification of patterns in the manipulation, a new classification of behaviors may emerge if
different frequent patterns are related to the same behavior in our actual framework. This is also the reason why
we did not want to refine most of the subject-related observables, as the analysis of the device-related ones may
change them over time.

Conclusion We think that the new framework of observables is relevant because it allows us to make the physical
reconstitution of an entire manipulation. Moreover, we think that this reconstitution may be useful to also better
identify the player’s internal state, either by training an algorithm capable of inducing the player’s internal state
from the physical reconstitution, or by allowing us to refine the model with currently unknown manipulation
patterns. However, this framework is far from complete, and we will now discuss the limits of this framework.

3. Discussion and future work

In the last section, we detailed a new framework, more precise than the actual one. However, it has some limits
that must be pointed out before deciding to consider it or not in future works.

A discussion about premises Our main constraint was that the CreaCube activity remained the same. The main
justification to this constraint is that we do not want to throw away existing data. For instance, the activity is not
redoable (as for problem-solving activities in general, a familiar activity is not resolved the same way as a
completely new one), so it requires finding new subjects. However, the activity already has other external factors
that can relativize this constraint. For instance, even with a perfect environment with no external
factors
whatsoever, depending on the subject’s condition (illness, fatigue, etc.) the experiment may be different from day
to day with the same subject. Another example is that there are already external factors such as a camera for the
experiment recording. As such, the addition of the constraint is only a constraint of caution, but we could consider
that, as there are already cameras and sensors, we could add other sensors.
Moreover, it appears that the problem of external sensors is not necessarily a problem. It seems that external
sensors, even when they are noticed by the subject (for instance when they are situated directly onto the subject
with something like eye-tracking goggles, are ultimately forgotten. As such, we could consider the (C1’) constraint
as irrelevant, and then be able to collect more data about the subject. We gave the example of the subject’s
position during this activity, it is something that could be observed with new sensors if we get rid of this constraint.
However, these new sensors should be able to prove their non-influence on the subject's behavior.
Another way of thinking about the problem is trying to minimize every external factor possible. Even then, our
constraint is not necessarily the best, because the activity already has sensors that are (even if they are not likely
to be) disturbing for the player. This constraint could have led us to change the activity protocol to try to identify
and minimize external factors.

Inria

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 19

In any case, the premises are not set in stone. We think that ours may be too cautious but were good constraints
as a first look at the observables framework.

A discussion about choices When it comes to refining device-related observables, the first question is : where
should we stop the refinement? We could consider that the best data about the external activity is the exact
evolution of the cubes, whether they are pivoted or moved a little for instance, implying that the refined model we
proposed is not enough. First, it is exact that this refinement may not be enough, and may be the object of a future
work.. We could refine more, but then we will be confronted with new questions, about the time sampling of
observables (some micro-movements of the cube may not be collected) or the precision of our sensors. Our
choice was motivated by the reconstruction of the manipulation, not in the exact spatialized reconstruction of the
manipulation, because we are trying to study general behaviors when a subject is confronted to a problem-solving
activity, so we are trying to identify general patterns.
We also decided to not insist on subject-related observables. As already detailed before, the player's internal state
representation models are neither complete nor definitive. For instance, even if we take the categorization of
emotions from Plutchik (1980), we could create a new framework with a new emotions representation model by
changing E observables and without changing anything else. This implies that our framework is flexible, because it
may be adapted to different behavioral or emotional models and help to determine if a model is more relevant than
another. To sum up, we chose not to change emotions or behavior observables because we want the framework to
be agnostic in terms of the player's internal state model.
Moreover, a future work could be to use our model without subject-related observables to confirm or infirm models
of behaviors or emotions during the CreaCube activity. For instance, we could verify if the identification of specific
behaviors correspond to specific manipulations of the cubes : a “trial and error” behavior could correspond to a
manipulation in which the cubes are assembled in structures of four, then disassembled and assembled again
differently. We could compare manipulation patterns with identified behaviors in order to determine an adequate
model of behaviors.

A discussion about feasibility We already justified that we can use this framework with the actual protocol,
because every refinement may be identified with the manual labeling of recordings. However, in order to justify the
constraint (C) and maybe be able to remove the camera, we started to design a new version of the material for the
CreaCube task, identical from the outside but different from the inside, allowing us to collect data we thought we
needed to automatically collect observables. It appears that it may be difficult to create a new version that is not
too expensive without changing the physical form of the activity. We are working on two different perspectives for
the CreaCube task :
-A new version of the activity inside a box with sensors to detect the spatial position of each cube during the
activity. We are trying to implement algorithms for automatic deduction of device-related observables thanks to the
the spatial position over time. For instance, we created a rule-based algorithm to identify H
evolution of
observables and U observables.
-Another version of the experiment adding eye-tracking goggles and data to concentrate on the player’s internal
state. For instance, a player may be handling a cube but be looking at another one. The eye-tracking technology
may help us to identify behaviors and affordance more precisely. As we already discussed, adding eye-tracking
goggles may not influence the subject too much while bringing a lot of new information about the player.

Through this reconsideration of the observables but also the device we aim not only to improve the indicators but
also improve the way of automatisation the data collection.

5
Acknowledgement: This work is a collaboration between the ANR CreaMaker
AEx AIDE .6

(ANR-18-CE38-0001) and the

5 https://creamaker.wordpress.com
6 https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne/en/aide/

RR N° 9467

20

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

Bibliography

Alexandre, F. (2020a, September 7). Creativity explained by Computational Cognitive Neuroscience. ICCC’20 -

International Conference on Computational Creativity. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02891491

Alexandre, F. (2020b). Creativity explained by Computational Cognitive Neuroscience. ICCC’20 - International

Conference on Computational Creativity, 4. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02891491

Barnabé, S., Denet, L., Manrique, M., Menon, D., Pascual, E., Romero, M., & Viéville, T. (2020). A low-cost

tabletop game to collect learning analytics during computational thinking using unplugged or tangible

activities [Report]. Inria. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03040909

Brand-Gruwel, S., Wopereis, I., & Vermetten, Y. (2005). Information problem solving by experts and novices:

Analysis of a complex cognitive skill. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(3), 487–508.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2004.10.005

Capron Puozzo, I. (2016). La créativité en éducation et formation. De Boeck Supérieur.

https://www.deboecksuperieur.com/ouvrage/9782807301894-la-creativite-en-education-et-formation

Constantinou, M., Ashendorf, L., & McCaffrey, R. J. (2005). Effects of a Third Party Observer During

Neuropsychological Assessment: When the Observer Is a Video Camera. Journal of Forensic

Neuropsychology, 4(2), 39–47. https://doi.org/10.1300/J151v04n02\_04

Gaut, B. (2010). The Philosophy of Creativity. Philosophy Compass, 5(12), 1034–1046.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-9991.2010.00351.x

Greenwald, N. L. (2000). Learning from Problems. Science Teacher, 67(4), 28–32.

Gris, G., & Bengtson, C. (2021). Assessment Measures in Game-based Learning Research: A Systematic Review.

International Journal of Serious Games, 8, 3–26. https://doi.org/10.17083/ijsg.v8i1.383

Jacob, S., & Warschauer, M. (2018). Computational Thinking and Literacy. Journal of Computer Science

Integration, 1. https://doi.org/10.26716/jcsi.2018.01.1.1

Kalmpourtzis, G., & Romero, M. (2020). Artifactual Affordances in Playful Robotics. In I. Marfisi-Schottman, F.

Bellotti, L. Hamon, & R. Klemke (Eds.), International Conference on Games and Learning Alliance (pp.

316–325). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-63464-3\_30

Kazdin, A. E. (1982). Single-Case Research Designs—Methods for clinical and applied settings. Oxford University

Inria

Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving with modular robotics 21

Press. //global.oup.com/ushe/product/single-case-research-designs-9780190079970

Leroy, A., Romero, M., & Cassone, L. (2021). Interactivity and materiality matter in creativity: Educational robotics

for the assessment of divergent thinking. Interactive Learning Environments, 0(0), 1–12.

https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.1875005

Mercier, C., Romero, M., Alexandre, F., & Vieville, T. (2022). An ontology to formalize a creative problem solving

task. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, Submiteed.

Mercier, C., Roux, L., Romero, M., Alexandre, F., & Viéville, T. (2021). Formalizing Problem Solving in

Computational Thinking: An Ontology approach. 2021 IEEE International Conference on Development

and Learning (ICDL), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDL49984.2021.9515660

Missier, F. D., & Fum, D. (2002). Declarative and Procedural Strategies in Problem Solving: Evidence from the

Toads and Frogs Puzzle. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive

Science Society. Routledge.

Newell, A. (1981). The Knowledge Level: Presidential Address. AI Magazine, 2(2), 1–1.

https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v2i2.99

Oltețeanu, A.-M. (2020). Cognition and the Creative Machine: Cognitive AI for Creative Problem Solving. Springer

International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30322-8

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2013). Draft PISA 2015 Collaborative Problem

Solving Framework.

Plutchik, R. (1980). Chapter 1—A GENERAL PSYCHOEVOLUTIONARY THEORY OF EMOTION. In R. Plutchik &

H. Kellerman (Eds.), Theories of Emotion (pp. 3–33). Academic Press.

https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-558701-3.50007-7

Romero, M. (2017). CreaCube, analyse de la résolution créative de problèmes par le biais d’une tâche de

robotique modulaire. Journées Nationales de la Recherche en Robotique, JNRR 2017, 1.

Romero, M., David, D., & Lille, B. (2019). CreaCube, a Playful Activity with Modular Robotics. In M. Gentile, M.

Allegra, & H. Söbke (Eds.), Games and Learning Alliance (Vol. 11385, pp. 397–405). Springer

International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-11548-7\_37

Romero, M., DeBlois, L., & Abajyan, P. (2018). CréaCube, comparaison de la résolution créative de problèmes,

chez des enfants et des adultes, par le biais d’une tâche de robotique modulaire. Mathematice 61. En

ligne: Http://revue.sesamath.net/spip.php?article1104. 61.

Romero, M., Freiman, V., & Rafalska, M. (2022). Techno-creative problem solving (TCPS) framework for

transversal epistemological and didactical positions: The cases of CreaCube and the Tower of Hanoi task.

RR N° 9467

22

Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

Romero, M., Lepage, A., & Lille, B. (2017). Computational thinking development through creative programming in

higher education. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 14(1), 1–15.

https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-017-0080-z

Romero, M., Lille, B., & Patiño, A. (Eds.). (2017). Usages créatifs du numérique pour l’apprentissage au XXIe

siècle (1st ed.). Presses de l’Université du Québec. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1vw0rkx

Romero, M., Vieville, T., & Heiser, L. (2021). Analyse d’activités d’apprentissage médiatisées en robotique

pédagogique. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.10953.16489

Wiley, J. (1998). Expertise as mental set: The effects of domain knowledge in creative problem solving. Memory &

Cognition, 26(4), 716–730. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03211392

Inria

