When sharing computer science with everyone also helps
avoiding digital prejudices
Marie Duflot, Martin Quinson, Florent Masseglia, Didier Roy, Julien

Vaubourg, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Marie Duflot, Martin Quinson, Florent Masseglia, Didier Roy, Julien Vaubourg, et al.. When sharing
computer science with everyone also helps avoiding digital prejudices: Escape computer dirty magic:
learn Scratch !. SCRATCH, Aug 2015, Amsterdam, Netherlands. ￿hal-01154767￿

HAL Id: hal-01154767

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01154767

Submitted on 27 May 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution - ShareAlike 4.0 International License

ESCAPE COMPUTER DIRTY MAGIC: 
LEARN SCRATCH ! 
WHEN SHARING COMPUTER SCIENCE WITH EVERYONE ALSO 
HELPS AVOIDING DIGITAL PREJUDICES. 

Marie Duflot, Martin Quinson, Florent Masseglia, Didier Roy, 
Julien Vaubourg, Thierry Viéville.1 

Accepted to : http://www.scratch2015ams.org as a «practice report». 

Abstract 

We, computer scientists, have to increase human knowledge, e.g. help to better understand what is 
mechanical intelligence. We further have to contribute to generate good goods out of it. But we also 
have the duty to share this knowledge with everyone. To be sure that no one endure, whereas each 
one benefits from the derived technology. And we observe that the main challenge is : free people 
from preconception, misconception and prejudices about computers and robots. And the main 
enemy is “belief in artificial intelligence phantasms” ! To escape from such deleterious magic, 
creative computing with Scratch is our best friend, unplug activities our best lever and playful 
robotics our best partner. Let us tell it as a story.. 

Keywords Scratch, creative programming, computer science, popular education, preconception. 

Acknowledgments We are especially thankfull to Martine Courbin-Coulaud and Valérie François 
regarding the contents engeenering of Pixees and Véronique Poirel for the organization of the 
CodCodCoding action. 

1. Introduction: why sharing useless computer science concepts with my father 
or mother in law 

 France is quite a nice country. However, regarding digital 
literacy, France is a retarded country. Believe it or not, but 
we do not teach computer science to our kids, not even 
computer technology, only hardly to use common software. 
The reason is that we collectively do not even realize that 
there is something to learn here, since nobody has taught us 
what it really is. 

 And the consequence is that since computing is not 

1 

 Inria, BP 105, 78153 LeChesnay Cdx, France. Contact: mecsci-contact@inria.fr 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supposed to be science, while computers work amazingly and do fascinating things, this must be … 
magic. Not “nice magic” (the one you can play and have fun with), but “deleterious magic” (the one 
you endure and you are scared of). Exaggeration? Imagine people believing in entities created by 
humans but that can “breed”and become more clever than humans, thus (this is a minimal 
requirement if you are such an entity) dominate the world and (go ahead) eradicate the humankind. 
Some B soap-movie? No. A real claim by a tremendously clever guy2, very good in sciences .. but 
apparently not in computer science. 

 Is such an idea refutable? Easily, with a first year computer class argument. Such a reproducible 
artificial intelligence must indeed at least be able to detect (and correct) its own bugs. Say, infinite 
loops. However, there is no (finite) algorithm that can detect all possible infinite loops in other 
algorithms. This is a proved theorem. So, such artificial intelligence is not even going to be able to 
avoid loop traps. Bad start to dominate the world, isn't it? More generally, computer science has 
studied in details the huge possibilities but also the strong intrinsic limits of computing. 

However, we can change our mind, and start being interested in computer science, so that it starts 
becoming something we understand. Then, the fact we understand allows us to get control and 
manage it. At this point, there is a legitimate question: How to? How can we help doing that? 

This is exactly the question we would like to address here. 

Without theory. Simply the will to witness about what we observe when we have the pleasure and 
privilege to share such pieces of computer science with everyone. We first are going to report on 
what can be done before using Scratch, i.e. unplugged activities, then how we use Scratch and 
finally how, after using Scratch we can introduce small robots to get further on. No theory here, 
only concrete stories and some comments about the lesson we learned from this practice. 

2. Starting to understand computing without any … computer 

Let us start with an experience where primary school 
teachers and computer scientists have shared some 
pieces of knowledge on the question of teaching the 
"science" in … computer science. Of course, different 
teachers have different reactions to the idea of 
bringing this subject into their classrooms, since it is 
not yet explicitly in the curriculum. Some are 
enthusiastic while others are more doubtful, but still 
curious about the approach, that can help for other 
topics. Because there is one point they all have in 
common: They are able to match computer science 
teaching with activities and subjects they already teach 
in their classrooms! Such a matching is certainly a decisive lever to help teachers take up computer 
science in its most transferable form to school. Here are some examples that have been effective. 

2 

 Stephen Hawking, actually http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30299992. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The universal idea of dichotomy. 

Next time you can talk with a primary school teacher 
about computer science in classrooms, try the following: 
Find some way to talk about dichotomy (e.g., how to find 
a word in a dictionary, or how to find the exact price 
between 0 an 1000€ just answering “more|less|exact” to 
any proposal). How dichotomy is wonderful compared to 
just enumerating the elements of a set. It is highly likely 
that the "target number" game is not unknown to such 
teacher. She or he will probably explain that the "target number" is an activity where the teacher 
writes a number between 1 and 100, hidden behind the black board (yes, with chalk... as in the 20th 
century). The kids then have to "guess" the number. They try, and try again, one after the other and, 
of course, they don't find it. Well, to be quite correct, they won't try hard enough to find it, and 
eventually lose patience. Then, the teacher says "New rules! Now you are allowed to ask 'greater or 
lower than?', shall we try again?". And, gradually, the teacher explains the quickest strategy to find 
the target number. The first good news here is that teachers already have dichotomy in their 
classrooms. The second good news is that, now, with the computer science point of view, they will 
be able to talk about algorithms and complexity thanks to this activity. They may give a comparison 
between the exhaustive search. They may ask "Kids, how many tests do you need if you are not 
lucky?" or "With dichotomy, how many numbers have we permanently cut after the first test? And 
after the second test?". This is just an update on this activity. It requires some knowledge about 
algorithms but, with the motivation of reusing existing activities, it should be feasible. 

The treasure hunt game to be played as a robot. 

Treasure hunt is an activity where a map of the classroom is 
drawn. A treasure is hidden somewhere in the classroom, and the 
map gives the path, from a start point, to the treasure. The goal, 
for kids, is to follow the instructions given by the map and find 
the treasure. This activity looks like a perfect opportunity to talk 
about bugs and languages, two major notions of computer science. 
Indeed, instructions might be given in two languages. The first 
one is based on relative positions (e.g. "one step forward", "rotate 
to the right, a quarter turn"). The second one is based on absolute 
references (e.g. "one step towards North"). This activity may be 
funny since you will have lots of bugs (and improbable 
situations). You may find that the bugs in an absolute reference frame stay closer to the treasure. 
But no mistake, a bug is a bug! In such a situation, the very interesting thing is that the kid is 
playing the role of a … robot. With, say, three instructions (forward, right, left) and no way to do 
something more clever. As a consequence, when playing this game we discover that a robot cannot 
“magically be clever”, it can only perform what it has been programmed for. This is a crucial point, 
we must help kids discover the profound difference between their human intelligence and computer 
mechanical intelligence (i.e., algorithmic intelligence). A step further, this “unplugged” activity is 
an excellent preparation to Scratch programming: Consider “drawing a square” (i.e., repeat 4 times, 
forward and turn right). Performing the activity in unplugged mode really lightens what is going to 
be done with the Scratch cat when online. 
Playing as a robot again, with extra-ordinary kids. 

3 

 
 
 
Following this idea, an activity has been created and experimented in a primary school with first 
year kids an with a class of kids with cognitive disorders. We managed to have them program, 
discuss on the interest of a programming language compared to another one, and even talk about 
complexity. 

A landscape was drawn on a very large piece of fabric 
that was put on the ground. Regular dots were put on the 
landscape to form a “grid” and thus define the length of a 
step for the robot. Several areas (water/mountain/forest) 
were not supposed to be reachable so no dots were drawn 
on them. The kids were first given a “program” consisting 
of arrows in different directions that one kid was reading 
when another one was executing, taking the role of a 

robot. 

 After some time to get used to the language, other programs were given, including some with bugs. 
The kids were globally puzzled. The robot was having doubts on the reader's job and vice versa, and 
it was interesting to see how difficult it was for them to finally tell that the error came for the 
professor who had written this program. It was then easy to make a parallel with programming, 
where the computer executes obediently the program, without making one extra step right to reach 
the bridge and not get into the river. The activity went on with several possible modifications of the 
language (allowing to turn and move forward instead of making steps in absolute directions, adding 
numbers to group together several steps forward, grabbing something on the ground with a new 
instruction). 

The last stage consisted in letting them write their own 
programs to accomplish different tasks. Several groups were 
each writing a program that was tested by another group. The 
kids thus needed to show their creativity as well as their 
ability to work together. Several questions arose in the teams, 
mainly concerning the different possibilities offered to 
achieve the same task. Was it better to move around and grab 
objects one by one or to go to a remote place and grab them 
all at the same time? This gave us another opportunity to link the activity with computer science by 
simply talking about complexity... with 7 years old kids. 

The feedback from the teachers was also very positive as, in addition to its interest related to 
computer science that was expected, the teachers found many other benefits in this activity, like 
cooperation between kids, the ability to move on a grid, identifying right and left (wristbands with 
colors and colored arrows were given to those who had troubles with differentiating them) among 
others. It is also worth saying that in this activity with such young kids, the possibility to move 
around was a very important factor. It really helped the participants to get into the activity, as well 
as to effectively see what a program was doing. In that respect an easy link can be made with 
Scratch activities that enable a cat to do the same things and even more... on a computer. 

The pancake sorting activity. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A key point in writing a program is being able to formalize one’s idea. Even when it is easy to play 
with tokens to sort them, it can be really tricky for people who don’t know anything about 
programming to explain the method, a method that is clear and simple enough so that a computer 
can execute it, and that works for every initial situation. This process has been experimented on a 
“pancake sorting” game, created in 2012 by Martin Quinson and Jean-Christophe Bach, reusing a 
common unplugged algorithm. The activity is organized in three stages, described below. 

A cook is making pancakes, supposed to be of 
non constant size, and wants them sorted with a 
nice pyramid shape, from the largest pancake at 
the bottom to the smallest at the top. Since he has 
no space left on his table and for obvious hygiene 
reasons cannot touch the pancakes with his hands, 
the only thing he can do is use his spatula, insert it 
in below any pancake in the stack, and turn upside 
down all the pancakes on his tool before putting 
them back on top of the remaining stack. In this 
activity the participants (from age 6 to adults) were asked to first play the game themselves with 
plastic “pancakes” of distinct size and colors, and try to get a sorted stack of pancakes while 
respecting the only move allowed. After a few minutes they almost all succeeded to sort their stack 
of pancakes, even if a few of them admitted that they didn’t know how they had done it. For those 
who were stuck at some point, usually close to the beginning, the role of the organizer was to lead 
them to identify what would be a good first step, here having the largest pancake at the bottom. The 
next stage was to let them do it using their eyes and their brain but not their hands. The stack was 
given to someone else who was supposed to execute the steps as asked. The instructions were 
usually of the form “flip the 3 topmost pancakes” or “take them down to the blue one and flip”. 
Several times however the instructions were imprecise like “flip the whole stack” and then “no, the 
whole stack minus the bottom one”. The bottom pancake was indeed already at the right place so 
for them it was obvious that the robot didn’t need to take it any more. This stage confronts them 
with the necessity to be precise enough so that the robot executes what the player means. The role 
of the robot is important as well: he has to be as idiot as a computer can be, precisely not trying to 
guess what the player means, which is surprisingly a not so easy task. The last stage was then to tell 
them that they could now only use their brain, and that the robot alone could use his eyes and hands. 
The stack was thus shuffled and hidden from the player. The participants were puzzled by the fact 
that they could not have a look, not even at the initial configuration. It was then easy to explain that, 
when interacting with a computer that is doing things in a 
microsecond, it is impossible to give the user a few 
seconds now and then to look at the configuration. A real 
programmer has to write an algorithm once, and let it 
execute to the end on its own. 

In this activity the three stages are important. If skipping 
the first one the participants might not know where to 
start and just not do anything. The second stage is not 
formal yet but it permits both to put words on an idea and 
to detect errors in the method and in the “programming 
language”. It is thus important to let them go through it without requiring a more formal/generic 
way of describing their strategy/algorithm. The third stage is the most difficult one for the 

5 

 
 
participants, but the errors detected during the second stage help them get an idea of what is to be 
done. If in trouble with this stage the player can go back to the stage where he could see the stack 
and be asked why he does a particular sequence of moves. The above activity can be enriched with 
a new constraint. Now pancakes have a nice side (the colored one) and an ugly one (white on our 
plastic pancakes). The player thus has to get them sorted by size but also to put all colored sides on 
top to have a nice pyramid. The solution doesn't change much but now when the biggest pancake is 
put on top of the stack, it has to be put upside down so that when the whole stack is flipped the 
colored side is on top. 

In addition to the ability to put one's ideas into words and formalize a solution to a problem, this 
activity has two other advantages. First it introduces two key ingredients in algorithms: conditional 
when deciding whether or not to flip the biggest pancake on top of the stack, and loops (or 
recursivity) when repeating the same three steps several times with a stack getting smaller and 
smaller. The second advantage is that this very simple algorithm is a good means to talk about 
complexity. Participants first think at how many moves they needed to sort the stack, and come up 
with the answer that it depends on the initial situation. The group usually quickly converges to a 
complexity in the worst case of 13 (if optimized) to 15 moves for five pancakes. It is then natural to 
extend that to an arbitrary number of pancakes and leading the discussion to the notion of 
complexity that takes into account the number of steps as a function of the size of the data. 

But it is now time to open the computers, and enjoy creative computing thanks to Scratch. 

3. Starting from Scratch to do more that scratch the surface 

Since September 2014, a programming club named CodCodCoding, mainly 
based on Scratch activities is opened to a group of nine children, between 
seven and twelve years old (six boys for three girls). We offer a two hours 
session each week, during a whole school year, with two animators. This 
activity comes from a partnership between Inria (the main research center in 
computer science in France) and a French local youth cultural center (MJC 
Centre Social Nomade). As a result, one animator is a PhD student in 
computer science, while the other one is a youth facilitator. Thanks to these 
dual skills, we experimented various tips to teach Creative Programming to 
children. The Creative Computing Book proposed by the Scratch Ed. was our 
main resource for the animators. This is why Inria have translated this precious resource in French 
(available on https://pixees.fr) with the equally precious «Starting from Scratch» manual from the 
Royal Society of Edinburgh. 

Though such manuals are very rich in terms of contents, in such a context children prefer handouts 
with only the five main instructions or steps for the current working session. Sticking to these five 
instructions in order and checking that it was correct proved out to be already a challenge for kids 

that do not learn computer science. 

In this section we would like to report on a 
very interesting aspect of programming small 
projects with Scratch. Beyond computing, it is 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a real lever to discover how to work together and how to learn experimental collective 
investigation. 

One of the main difficulties for the children is debugging their own code. Writing a clean code is 
very important, because they have to be able to read it easily when a bug occurs. Moreover, they 
have often the responsibility to write something clear enough for someone else to carry on with it. 
The Scratch remix function is a very good opportunity to educate such free software concepts, and 
the clarity of the code is one of them. A perfect example of such difficulties is the chosen names for 
their messages in Scratch: “lolooolloooooollllooo”, “rootttllfffffffroorlfrotlf” or “trololololo”. 
Describing the meaning with the right words was already a challenge. 

In order to help them regarding this issue we tried the Free Access Solution. During this session, 
they had to add a difficult functionality to their projects, without help from us. As a replacement, a 
computer with a Scratch project containing the solution, was freely available in the room. The main 
reaction of the kids was “oh, it's very easy if we have the solution, it's a cheat!”. In fact, they had not 
realized that the base of the project with the solution was not the same as theirs. As a result, they 
had to read and understand the code of the project to find the right blocks. This was a very good 
solution to help them to reread a source code and make them receptive to the importance of code 
clarity. 

Once a project was completed by the group, we asked each 
child to present her or his project to others. He or she had to 
explain how to use the project, to show how it worked, and 
possibly to talk about the difficulties encountered. The other 
children had to evaluate the project, with reasoned and 
constructive comments. Knowing how to correctly review a 
work is very important, but very difficult. The audience must 
comment the work with constructive remarks beyond “so good” 
or “that sucks”, and not only through comparisons with their 
own version of the project (“mine is better”). We also noticed that, with ten kids around the same 
computer, everybody was talking at the same time and they were not listening to each other. 

To solve this problem, we used the well-known Talking Stick (a piece of rope) trick, allowing 
someone to talk. There are two sticks, one for the one presenting the project, and one for the 
reviewer. This simple trick really changed the group behavior. It became a game for them, and each 
child with the stick played the right role, trying to say something clever and useful, while others 
quietly listened to him. Other children seemed to think about something even more relevant to say, 
as in a constructive contest. The remarks were sometimes composed of somehow meaningless 
words, but they were globally progressing in the right direction. 

Sometimes, we observed a child “accusing” another one of cheating in doing the same thing as 
him. View something and reproduce it is not necessarily a cheat, because a creation is rarely 
completely new and often inspired from others. We all unconsciously copied some ideas from 
games we know for creating our own game. It was very difficult to convince them that it can be 
satisfying to be copied, because only good ideas are copied. On the other hand, we also stated that 
plagiarizing someone is not a good thing, especially if this person is not cited in the project. The 
difference between inspiration and plagiary is subtle, and we helped to draw the limit between 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
them. This point is important for education, beyond Scratch and the programming world. It opens 
the door to true collaborations. 

When they create, the children do not have the final user in mind. 
They create their own game, for them, with their own rules and 
logic. For example, for moving a sprite with the keyboard, a 
children had associated the left arrow key to an upward movement, 
the right key to a left shift, up key to a downward movement and 
the down key to a right shift. This seems right to the children, who 
does not understand why he should change. Another example is 
the rules at the beginning of the game. Some rules are totally fool 
and impossible to guess without notice, e.g. you can win only if 

you touch the top-right corner of the scene, after catching all the items. 

Sometimes, visitors or other animators were present in the cultural center. We took this opportunity 
to ask someone to try the children's game. Once a kid considered he had completed his game, he 
could do the next activity only if the tester was able to play his game alone and without difficulties 
to understand it. As a result, the children were forced to write rules at the beginning of the game, 
and chose the keys to use with a minimum of universal logic. 

Shall we stay “in” the computer ? Not necessarily: We may also animate real objects to better 
understand the interaction between computing and the real world. This is our last step. 

7. Playing with robots to fall in love with computer science 

Lola, 8 years old: "I knowprogramming, I do not like it. My brother showed me. It is only words 
everywhere. So boring. More than that, it is ugly. " 
Ramzy, 7 years old: "What are you talking about? So strange! You just like IniRobot, you use it to 
program Thymio using VPL. But programming, you do not like! " 
Lola, again: "Yeah. This is it. No matter if it bothers you :)" 

InriRobot? It is a series of open source didactic robotics activities, written in French, and 
created by the Inria https://flowers team 
Thymio II? It is an open-source tiny mobile robot toy, mainly developed by the LSRO Team 
of the EPFL. 
VPL? The acronym for Visual Programming Language, the way Lola likes to program her 
robot. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A sequence of robot programming activity using the Thymio II with the VPL interface. 

With IniRobot, children have a series of tasks to perform. They gradually discover the robot 
mechanisms and learn how to program it through an easy to use purely visual interface. To realize a 
“mission” one connects proximity sensors, accelerometer, light and sound sensor to the wheel 
motors, colored LEDs, or sound synthesizer. Each group of kids can progress at its own pace 
through small activities. This goes on until the last challenge: Explore an unknown area avoiding 
obstacles. After inventing their own algorithm and programming it, they test the robot process, in 
order to adjust its exploration strategy. And robot visual and audio decoration is not to be forgotten, 
as it is a good way to recognize each robot, to discover programming, and to create funny and cute 
things. Then begins an amazing and unexpected choreography of robots on the given pathway, in 
alternance with interactions among themselves, and with obstacles. Furthermore, a color pen allows 
to mark the robot trajectory. 

With such a didactic paradigm, robotics offers a micro-world of 
integrated learning, quite motivating. The key point is that one puts 
into action computational thinking, linking the digital world and the 
physical world. Using what we may call “tangible objects”. As such, it 
is an irreplaceable paradigm for teaching computer science, including 
investigation, learning by trials / errors, discovering cooperation in a 
small group, and so on. 

Then, it appears that the existing visual programming language is quite attractive and easy to learn, 
but only includes sequences of event-driven construction. The only king of this kingdom is : 

“On  do ” 

9 

(cid:9)! (cid:9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As such, it is challenging, because it allows kids to think not only 
as a “piece of code” but make them smoothly familiar with 
reactive programming, which is the base of modern computing 
(e.g., Javascript in a Web page or Smartphone applications). 
Scratch includes such a paradigm, indeed. But also allows to 
make nice loops, manage variables, make use of timers and 
exchange messages. This is the reason why we have also3 
connected Thymio II, with the related IniRobot activities, to both 
the 
Snap 
(http://snap.berkeley.edu) platforms (http://www.inirobot.fr). The 
first one, to be able to share activities with the biggest (and smartest :)) creative programming 
environment. The second one, to be able to create “tractable” dedicated interfaces (e.g., 
oversimplified, or integrated on a Web page with other medias). 

(http://scratch.mit.edu) 

Scratch 

and 

the 

So Lola is going to be happy: she will program all what she wants with a cute and not ugly tool. 

8. Conclusion: how to get one step further 

The next step is to be able to help not only a few groups of kids, but push this initiative to a much 
larger scale. The lever is the training of teachers and activity organizers. To this end, resources, 
online support, best practice reports, and news sharing have been made available. We have 
translated available resources and an on-line MOOC formation is in progress. 

http://jecode.org a community of actors. 

https://pixees.fr a scientific 
community, online to help 
you sharing computer 
science with everyone. 

Al

l-inclusive open resources, 
and fully validated, made 
available. 

3 
 In fact, the development effort to connect Scratch (and Snap) to the smart open-source and open-hardware 
humanoid robot https://www.poppy-project.org printable on 3D printers, and Poppy ergo Junior, one of his cousins. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So that kids “no only play video-games but also build their own” (B.H. Obama II, 2013). 

11 

