A Density-Driven Method for the Placement of
Biological Cells Over Two-Dimensional Manifolds
Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier. A Density-Driven Method for the Placement of Biological Cells Over Two-
￿hal-
Dimensional Manifolds. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 2018, 12, ￿10.3389/fninf.2018.00012￿.
01617732v2￿

HAL Id: hal-01617732

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01617732v2

Submitted on 29 Mar 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

A density-driven method for the placement of
biological cells over two-dimensional manifolds

Nicolas P. Rougier∗

February 23, 2018

Abstract

We introduce a graphical method originating from the computer graphics domain that is used
for the arbitrary placement of cells over a two-dimensional manifold. Using a bitmap image whose
luminance provides cell density, this method guarantees a discrete distribution of the positions of
the cells respecting the local density. This method scales to any number of cells, allows one to spec-
ify arbitrary enclosing shapes and provides a scalable and versatile alternative to the more classical
assumption of a uniform spatial distribution. The method is illustrated on a discrete homogeneous
neural field, on the distribution of cones and rods in the retina and on the neural density of a flat-
tened piece of cortex.

Keywords: Stippling, Voronoi, spatial distribution, density, cells, neurons, retina, cortex.

1 Introduction

2 Methods

2.1 Centroidal Voronoi Tesselation .
.
2.2 Weighted Centroidal Voronoi Tesselation .

.

.

.

.

.

3 Results

.
3.1 Case 1: Retina cells
.
.
3.2 Case 2: Neural field .
3.3 Case 3: Cortical density .

.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

4 Discussion

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

2

3
3
5

6
6
7
10

11

∗INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France – Nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr

1

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

1 Introduction

The spatial localization of neurons in the brain plays a critical role since their connectivity patterns
may depend on their type and their position relatively to nearby neurons and areas (Ivenshitz & Segal,
2010). In the cortex, the probability of a connection existing between any two given areas declines
sharply with distance (Markov et al., 2013), following an exponential decay with distance according
to (Ercsey-Ravasz et al., 2013). For more local connections, such as interneurons, they generally have
localized axonal arbors and interact mostly with close neighbours, depending on the distance (Jiang
et al., 2015) from which a Gaussian probability of connection as a function of lateral distance can be
derived (Potjans & Diesmann, 2012). Interestingly enough, whereas the neuroscience literature pro-
vides many data about the spatial distribution of neurons in different areas and species (e.g. (Pasternak
& Woolsey, 1975) about the spatial distribution of neurons in the mouse barrel cortex, (McCormick,
DeVaul, Shankle, & Fallon, 2000) about the neuron spatial distribution and morphology in the human
cortex, (Blazquez-Llorca et al., 2014) about the spatial distribution of neurons innervated by chandelier
cells), the computational literature exploiting such data is rather scarce and the spatial localization is
hardly taken into account in most neural network models (be it computational, cognitive or machine
learning models). One reason may be the inherent difficulty in describing the precise topography of a
population such that most of the time, only the overall topology is described in terms of layers, struc-
tures or groups with their associated connectivity patterns (random, one to one, one to all, receptive
fields, etc.). One can also argue that such precise localization is not necessary because for some models,
it is not relevant (machine learning) while for some others, it may be subsumed into the notion of cell
assemblies (Hebb, 1949) that represent the spatiotemporal structure of a group of neurons wired and
acting together. Considering cell assemblies as the basic computational unit, one can consider local
interactions to be subsumed into such assemblies and consequently, the exact spatial position of the
neurons is not relevant. However, if cell assemblies allow to greatly simplify models, they also bring
implicit limitations of which some have been highlighted in (Nallapu, Surampudi, & Rougier, 2017),
such as for example the impossibility of having ambiguous representations (if such representations
are identified with a single cell assembly) or to have topographic projections between two different
groups. To overcome such potential limitations, we think the spatial localization of neurons is an im-
portant criterion worth to be studied because it could induce original connectivity schemes from which
new computational properties can be derived as illustrated in Figure 2. However, before studying the

Figure 1: Stippling. According to Wikipedia2, Stippling is the creation of a pattern simulating varying
degrees of solidity or shading by using small dots. Such a pattern may occur in nature and these effects are
frequently emulated by artists. The pair of boots (left part) have been first converted into a gray-level
image and processed into a stippling figure (right part) using the weighted Voronoi stippling technique
by (Secord, 2002) and replicated in (Rougier, 2017). Image from (Rougier, 2017) (CC-BY license).

influence of the spatial localization of neurons, it is necessary to first design a method for the arbi-
trary placement of neurons. This article introduces a graphical and scalable method for the automatic

2

placement of neurons (or any other type of cells actually) enforcing a user-provided density map. This
graphical method is based on a stippling technique originating from the computer graphics domain for
non-photorealistic rendering as illustrated in Figure 1.

2 Methods

57

58

59

60

62

63

Blue noise (Ulichney, 1987) is an even, isotropic yet unstructured distribution of points (Mehta, Wang, & 61
Ramamoorthi, 2012) and has minimal low frequency components and no concentrated spikes in the power
spectrum energy (Zhang et al., 2016). Said differently, blue noise (in the spatial domain) is a type of
noise with intuitively good properties: points are evenly spread without visible structure (see figure 3
for the comparison of a uniform distribution and a blue noise distribution). This kind of noise has been
extensively studied in the computer graphics domain and image processing because it can be used for
object distribution, sampling, printing, half-toning, etc. One specific type of spatial blue noise is the
Poisson disc distribution that is a 2D uniform point distribution in which all points are separated from 68
each other by a minimum radius (see right part of figure 3). Several methods have been proposed for the
generation of such noise, from the best in quality (dart throwing (Cook, 1986)) to faster ones (rejection
sampling (Bridson, 2007)), see (Lagae & Dutr´e, 2008) for a review. An interesting variant of the Poisson
disk distribution is an anisotropic distribution where local variations follow a given density function
as illustrated in Figure 1 where the density function has been specified using the image gray levels. On
the stippled image on the right, darker areas have a high concentration of dots (e.g. soles of the boots)
while lighter areas such as the background display a sparse distribution of dots. There exist several
techniques for computing such stippling density-driven patterns (optimal transport (Mehta et al., 2012),
variational approach (Chen, Yuan, Choi, Liu, & Wang, 2012), least squares quantization (Lloyd, 1982),
etc.) but the method proposed by (Secord, 2002) is probably the most straightforward and simple and
has been replicated in (Rougier, 2017).

72

64

73

69

71

67

66

70

65

78

75

77

74

76

79

2.1 Centroidal Voronoi Tesselation
Considering a set of n points P = {Pi}i∈[1,n] on a finite domain D ∈ R2, the Voronoi tesselation
V (P ) = {Vi}i∈[1,n] of P is defined as:

80

81

82

∀i ∈ [1, n], Vi = {x ∈ D | (cid:107)x − Pi(cid:107) ≤ (cid:107)x − Pj(cid:107), ∀j (cid:54)= i}

(1)

Reciprocally, the (unique) Delaunay triangulation T (P ) = {Ti}i∈[1,n] of P is the dual graph of the
Voronoi diagram and defined such that no point in P is inside the circumcircle of any triangles in
T (P ). The centers of the circumcircles are equivalent to the Voronoi diagram, i.e. a partition of D 85
into Voronoi cells. For each of the cell Vi, we can compute its centroid Ci which is the center of mass
of the cell. A Voronoi tesselation is said to be centroidal when we have ∀i ∈ [1, n], Ci = Pi (see figure 3).

87

83

86

84

For an arbitrary set of points, there is no guarantee that the corresponding Voronoi tesselation is
centroidal but different methods can be used to generate a centroidal tesselation from an arbitrary set
of points. One of the most straightforward and iterative methods is the Lloyd relaxation scheme (Lloyd,
1982):

1. The Voronoi diagram of the n points is computed

2. The centroid of each of the n Voronoi cell is computed.

3. Each point is moved to the corresponding centroid of its Voronoi cell

4. The method terminates if criterion is met (see below), else go to 1

2 Stippling Wikipedia entry at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stippling

3

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

Figure 2: Influence of spatial distribution on signal propagation. A. A k-nearest neighbours
(k=5) connectivity pattern shows mid-range connection lengths in low local density areas (left part)
and short-range connection lengths in high density areas (right part). B. Shortest path from top to
bottom using a k-nearest neighbours connectivity pattern (k=5). The lower the density, the shorter the
path and the higher the density, the longer the path. On the far left, the shortest path from top to bottom
is only 6 connections while this size triples on the far right to reach 19 connections. Said differently, the
left part is the fast pathway while the right part is the slow pathway given some input data that would
feed the architecture from the top. C. Due to the asymmetry of the cell positions, a signal entering on
the top side (indicated with small arrows) travels at different speeds and will consequently reach the
bottom side at different times. This represents a spatialization of time. Color represents time. D. Due
to the asymmetry of the cell positions, a signal entering on the left side (indicated with small arrows)
slows down while traveling before reaching the right side. This represents a compression of time and
may serve as a short-term working memory. Color represents time.

4

The algorithm finishes when the maximum distance between points and centroids is less than a given
threshold as illustrated in Figure 3. It is to be noted that because of numerical imprecisions, there is no
guarantee that an arbitrary small threshold can be reached.

97

98

Figure 3: Centroidal Voronoi Tesselation. A. Voronoi diagram of a uniform distribution (n=100)
where red dots represent the uniform distribution and white circles represent the centroids of each
Voronoi cell. B. Centroidal Voronoi diagram where the point distribution matches the centroid distri-
bution which constitutes a blue noise distribution (i.e. a distribution that is roughly uniformly random
with no preferred inter-point directions or distances according to the definition of (Ebeida et al., 2014)).
This figure has been obtained from the initial distribution on the left after 50 iterations of the Lloyd
relaxation algorithm.

2.2 Weighted Centroidal Voronoi Tesselation

99

100

The weighted centroidal Voronoi tesselation, as illustrated in Figure 4, has been proposed in (Secord,
2002) and replicated in (Rougier, 2018). It is based on the Lloyd relaxation scheme with the notable
difference that the centroids are now weighted according to the local density. This density information 103
is provided using a bitmap image that represents the domain D ∈ R2. Any of the RGB channels of
the image can be used to provide the density information at a specific integer coordinate position. By
arbitrary convention, we’ll consider the darker color (e.g. black) to have the the higher density. The
method is then as follows:

105

102

101

106

104

107

1. The density image is resized if necessary (no interpolation)

2. The Voronoi diagram of the n points is computed

3. Each Voronoi cell is rasterized as a set of pixels

4. The weighted centroid is computed over each of the rasterized cell

5. Each point is moved to the corresponding centroid of its Voronoi cell

6. The method terminates if criterion is met, else go to 2

A different criterion for the termination is to use a fixed number of iterations as we did for all the ex-
amples introduced in this article (n=25).

5

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

ABFigure 4: Weighted centroid The weighted centroid of a Voronoi cell is the center of mass computed
over the rasterized cell.

Figure 4 illustrates the main difficulty in the method, that is, the rasterization of the cells and the
computation of the weighted centroids. Since we use a bitmap image providing the density informa-
tion and because the weighted centroids are computed over rasterized cells, it is quite obvious that the
precision of the method is heavily dependent on the number of points and the size of the image. We
estimated that a good precision can be reached if the mean number of pixels of a rasterized Voronoi
cell is around 100 pixels (see figure 5). For example, if we have initially 1000 points to distribute and
use a 100 × 100 input image, we would have only 10 pixels (100 ∗ 100/1000) to compute the weighted
centroid. Resizing first the image to 400 × 400 (without interpolation) makes this number to grow to
160 (400 ∗ 400/1000). To obtain this 100 pixels estimation, we generated several polygons at different
resolutions and compared the actual centroid (using its geometric definition) with the estimated cen-
troid, considering a uniform density (whose center of mass is equal to the geometric centroid in such
case).

Figure 6 shows the distribution of four populations with respective size 1000, 2500, 5000 and 10000
cells, using the same linear gradient as input. The local density is approximately independent of the
total number of cells.

3 Results

We’ll now illustrate the use of the proposed method on three different cases.

3.1 Case 1: Retina cells

The human retina counts two main types of photoreceptors, namely rods and cones (L-cones, M-cones
and S-cones). They are distributed over the retinal surface in a non-uniform way, with a high con-
centration of cones (L-cones and M-cones) in the foveal region while the rods are to be found mostly
in the peripheral region with a peak density at around 18-20◦ of foveal eccentricity. Furthermore, the
respective size of those cells is different, rods being much smaller than cones. The distribution of rods
and cones in the human retina has been extensively studied in the literature and is described precisely
in a number of works (Curcio, Sloan, Kalina, & Hendrickson, 1990; Ahnelt & Kolb, 2000). Our goal here
is not to fit the precise distribution of cones and rods but rather to give a generic procedure that can
be eventually used to fit those figures, for a specific region of the retina or the whole retina. The main

116

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143

6

Centroid(x0, y0)(x1, y1)(x2, y2)(x3, y3)(x4, y4)(x0, y0)(x1, y1)(x2, y2)(x3, y3)(x4, y4)Weighted centroid(center of mass)Voronoi pointVoronoi pointFigure 5: Rasterized centroid precision. The difference between the geometrical centroid (circle) and
the centroid computed over the rasterized polygon (cross) is dependent on the size of the polygon.

difficulty is the presence of two types of cells having different sizes. Even though there exist blue-noise
sampling procedures taking different sizes into account (Zhang et al., 2016), we’ll use instead the afore-
mentioned method using a two stages procedure as illustrated in Figure 7.

A first radial density map is created for the placement of 25 cones and the stippling procedure is
applied for 15 steps to get the final positions of the 25 cones. A linear rod density map is created where
discs of varying (random) sizes of null density are created at the positions of the cones. These discs will
prevent the rods from spreading over these areas. Finally, the stippling procedure is applied a second
time over the newly built density map for 25 iterations. The final result can be seen in Figure 7C where
rods are tightly packed on the left, loosely packed on the right and nicely circumvent the cones.

3.2 Case 2: Neural field

Dynamic neural fields (DNF) describe the dynamics of a large population of neurons by taking the
continuum limit in space, using coarse-grained properties of single neurons to describe the activity
(Wilson & Cowan, 1972, 1973; Amari, 1977; Coombes, beim Graben, Potthast, & Wright, 2014). In this
example, we consider a neural field with activity u that is governed by an equation of the type:

τ

∂u(x, t)
∂t

= −u(x, t) +

(cid:90) +∞

−∞

w(x, y)f (u(y, t))dy + I(x) + h

The lateral connection kernel w is a difference of Gaussians (DoG) with short range excitation and long
range inhibition that reads:

w(x) = Ie exp
The input I(x) is a scaled white noise that reads:

−x2
σe −Ii exp

−x2
σi

and the function f is a clamped linear function between 0 and 1 such that:

I(x) = Is ∗ unif orm(noise)

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

f (x) = max(min(x, 1), 0)

7

ABC10×1020×2030×3040×4050×50Size (pixels²)0.000.050.100.150.200.25Precision (pixels)ABCFigure 6: Non-uniform distribution (linear gradient). Different population distributions (size of
1000, 2500, 5000 and 10000 cells) using the same linear gradient as input have been computed. Each
distribution has been split into four equal areas and the respective proportion and number of cells
present in the area is indicated at the bottom of the area. The proportion of cells present in each area
is approximately independent (±2.5%) of the overall number of cells.

8

1000 cells7.10% (n=71)19.60% (n=196)31.30% (n=313)42.00% (n=420)2500 cells6.12% (n=153)19.28% (n=482)30.28% (n=757)44.32% (n=1108)5000 cells6.24% (n=312)19.04% (n=952)30.98% (n=1549)43.74% (n=2187)10000 cells6.34% (n=634)18.08% (n=1808)31.91% (n=3191)43.67% (n=4367)Figure 7: Cones and rods distribution. A. The density map for the placement of cones (n=25) is a
circular and quadratic gradient with highest density in the center. B. The density map for the placement
of rods (n=2500) is built using the rods distribution. Starting from a linear density, holes with different
sizes are created at the location of each cone and prevent rods from spreading over these areas during
the stippling procedure. C. Final distribution of cones and rods. Cones are represented as white blobs
(splines) while rods are represented as Voronoi regions using random colors to better highlight the
covered area.

9

ABitmap (1024x1024)BBitmap (1024x1024)C163

164

In order to solve the neural field equation, the spatial domain was discretized into a 40 × 40 grid,
the temporal resolution was set to dt = 100ms and the simulation was run for t = 10 seconds.
Relevant parameters are given in table 1. In Figure 8A, one can see the characteristic Turing patterns

Parameter
Grid size
Timestep
Duration
Time constant
Resting potential
Input scaling
Noise level
Scaling factor
Sigma excitatory
Scale excitatory
Sigma inhibitory
Scale inhibitory

Name Value
n
dt
t
τ
h
Is
N
s
σe
Ie
σi
Ii

40
100ms
10s
750ms
0
0.1
0.1
402/n2
0.05
0.15 × s
0.085
0.05 × s

Table 1: Parameters for the neural fields

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

186

187

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

that have formed within the field. The number and size of clusters depend on the lateral connection
kernel. Figure 8B shows the discretized and homogeneous version of the DNF where each cell has been
assigned a position on the field, the connection kernel function and the parameters being the same as
in the continuous version. The result of the simulation shown in Figure 8B is the normalized histogram
of cell activities using 40 × 40 regular bins. One can see the formation of the Turing patterns that are
similar to the continuous version. In Figure 8C however, the positions of the cells have been changed
(using the proposed stippling method) such that there is an annulus of higher density. This is the only
difference with the previous model. While the output can still be considered to be Turing patterns, one
can see clearly that the activity clusters are precisely localized onto the higher density regions. Said
differently, the functional properties of the field have been modified by a mere change in the structure.
This suggests that the homogeneous condition of neural fields (that is the standard hypothesis in most
works because it facilitates mathematical analysis) is actually quite a strong limitation that constrains
the functional properties of the field.

3.3 Case 3: Cortical density

It has been shown in (C. E. Collins, Airey, Young, Leitch, & Kaas, 2010; Young, Collins, & Kaas, 2013;
Christine E. Collins et al., 2016) that the neural density varies across and within cortical areas with an
inverse relationship to the average neuron size: larger neurons take up more space and thus cannot be
as densely packed as smaller neurons. (C. E. Collins et al., 2010) have studied the neural density in a
cortical hemisphere of five primates and provided all the relevant data in the supplementary informa-
tion. They dissected the flat hemisphere into a grid of 5 × 5mm piece and used an isotropic fractionator
method to estimate the number of cells (neurons and non-neurons). To illustrate the method, we’ll use
the data from one of the two galagos that have been studied in order to produce a discrete distribution
of sites enforcing the local measured density.

Using the Inkscape software3, we opened the supplementary information PDF file from (C. E.
Collins et al., 2010) and isolated the top of the figure S3 (galago 07-104). We renamed each individ-
ual patch according to the patch number indicated in the figure and saved the result as a SVG file. We
took the first datasheet (galago 07-104) of the S1 dataset (Excel format) and converted it to a CSV for-
mat. Using the matplotlib library (Hunter, 2007), we produced a bitmap file (size 1000 × 1000 pixels see

3https://inkscape.org/en/

10

Figure 8: Non-homogeneous discrete neural field. Each plot has been smoothed using a bicubic
filter. A. Turing patterns resulting from a continuous and homogeneous neural field with constant and
noisy input. B. Turing patterns resulting from a discrete and homogeneous neural field with constant
and noisy input. White dots indicate the position of the cells. Mean activity is computed from the
histogram of neurons activity using 40 × 40 bins. C. Localized Turing patterns resulting from a discrete
and non-homogeneous neural field with constant and noisy input. White dots indicate the position of
the neurons. Mean activity is computed from the histogram of neuron activity using 40 × 40 bins.

figure 9-A) where each cortical patch was drawn using a gray level that corresponds to its normalized
density, a density of 1.0 (black color) corresponding to the most densely populated area (area 2).

Using the Shapely library (Gillies et al., 2007), we computed the convex hull of the whole set of the
36 cortical patches as well as the centroid for each individual patch. The boundary of the convex hull
was resampled such as to have 50 equidistant points along the outline. The density information for
these points was computed using the density of the nearest centroid. A cubic two-dimensional inter-
polation was computed inside the convex hull using a Clough-Tocher differential scheme (Alfeld, 1984)
and the result was saved as a bitmap file (size 1000 × 1000 pixels, see figure 9-C). We’ll refer to this
interpolation as the continuous case.

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

The two bitmap files were processed with the provided stippler script (Rougier, 2018) using the
red channel for density information and run over 25 iterations using N={1000, 5000, 10000, 25000,
50000} sites. The result, for a single run, is a file with the 2-D coordinates of the N sites. From these
coordinates, we computed the density for each of the original cortical patches by computing the patch 209
area size and the number of sites inside. Results are indicated in table 2. Unsurprisingly, the accuracy
of the distribution grows with the number of sites (with one exception in the continuous case). For
N=50,000 sites, the difference between the actual density and the distribution is within a margin of 5%.
In the continuous case however, it does not seem reasonable to expect a much higher accuracy than 213
in the discrete (patch) case because the bitmap 1000 × 1000 has been interpolated using only 36 sites
(patch centroids).

210

206

207

211

208

212

214

215

4 Discussion

216

We’ve introduced a graphical method for the placement of biological cells over a two-dimensional
manifold enforcing a density distribution that is provided using a bitmap image and the method has
been illustrated on three simple use cases. For a more realistic placement (i.e. actual three dimen-
sional structures), the method could be adapted but it is to be noted that several methods have been 220
recently proposed. Parametric anatomical modeling (Pyka, Klatt, & Cheng, 2014) allows one to model

219

218

217

221

11

A0.00.20.40.60.81.0B0.00.20.40.60.81.0C0.00.20.40.60.81.0Figure 9: Flattened cortex. Data from (C. E. Collins, Airey, Young, Leitch, & Kaas, 2010), supple-
mentary information. A. Each cortex piece was assigned a gray level corresponding to the normalized
density (density 1.0 being assigned to the most densely populated area). The result was saved as a
1000 × 1000 bitmap file (PNG). B. Result of the stippling procedure for 25,000 sites and 25 iterations
over the image generated in A. The mean difference for normalized density with actual data is 2.3%
(±2.0%). Borders of the individual patches are drawn over the distribution (it is not an artefact). C.
Continuous cubic interpolation of the normalized density over the convex hull of A, using the centroid
of each patch for computing the interpolation. The result was saved as a 1000 × 1000 bitmap file (PNG).
D. Result of the stippling procedure for 25,000 sites and 25 iterations over the image generated in C.
The mean difference for normalized density with actual data is 2.9% (±2.8%). Outside sites (gray dots)
are excluded and borders of the individual patches are drawn over the figure (it is not an artefact).

12

ABCDN=1000
N=5000
N=10000
N=25000
N=50000

Patch
5.4% (±4.3%)
2.8% (±2.9%)
2.8% (±1.8%)
2.3% (±2.0%)
0.8% (±0.6%)

Continuous Computation time
42s
6.9% (±4.4%)
1m52
3.6% (±2.3%)
2m55
4.0% (±3.0%)
5m35
2.9% (±2.8%)
8m44
2.6% (±2.0%)

Table 2: Mean difference between the actual (normalized) density and the mean neural density using a
patch bitmap (figure 9-A) and a continuous cubic interpolated bitmap (figure 9-C) for a various number
of sites. Computation times are only indicative and have been measured on a MacBook Pro with an
Intel Core i7.

the anatomical layout of neurons as well as their projections while the work by (Schneider, Cuntz, & 222
Soltesz, 2014) allows one to go even further down by taking into account the dendritic morphology of
neurons. However, due to its simplicity and beyond a strict biological plausibility, we think the pro-
posed method might be interesting for a number of models, intermediate between symbolic models
and realistic models. Our intuition is that such topography may be an important aspect that needs to
be taken into account and studied in order for a model to benefit from structural functionality. For
example, the Figure 2 shows the influence of the spatial distribution on the signal propagation when 228
considering a simple nearest neighbours connectivity scheme. Even though such connectivity is un-
likely to exist inside the brain, it might be nonetheless worth to be studied because it may provide
structural functionality, that is, a function that directly derives from the topography.

223

224

227

226

225

230

229

231

Notes: All figures were produced using the Python scientific stack, namely, SciPy (Jones, Oliphant,
& Peterson, 2001), Matplotlib (Hunter, 2007) and NumPy (van der Walt, Colbert, & Varoquaux, 2011).
All sources are available on GitHub at github.com/rougier/density-driven (Rougier, 2018).

References

Ahnelt, P. K. & Kolb, H. (2000). The mammalian photoreceptor mosaic-adaptive design. Progress in Retinal and

Eye Research, 19(6), 711–777. doi:10.1016/s1350-9462(00)00012-4

Alfeld, P. (1984). A trivariate clough—tocher scheme for tetrahedral data. Computer Aided Geometric Design, 1(2),

169–181. doi:10.1016/0167-8396(84)90029-3

Amari, S.-I. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in lateral-inhibition type neural fields. Biological Cybernetics,

27(2), 77–87. doi:10.1007/bf00337259

Blazquez-Llorca, L., Woodruff, A., Inan, M., Anderson, S. A., Yuste, R., DeFelipe, J., & Merchan-Perez, A. (2014).
Spatial distribution of neurons innervated by chandelier cells. Brain Structure and Function, 220(5), 2817–
2834. doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0828-3

Bridson, R. (2007). Fast poisson disk sampling in arbitrary dimensions. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 sketches on -

SIGGRAPH ’07. ACM Press. doi:10.1145/1278780.1278807

Chen, Z., Yuan, Z., Choi, Y.-K., Liu, L., & Wang, W. (2012). Variational blue noise sampling. IEEE Transactions on

Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(10), 1784–1796. doi:10.1109/tvcg.2012.94

Collins, C. E. [C. E.], Airey, D. C., Young, N. A., Leitch, D. B., & Kaas, J. H. (2010). Neuron densities vary across and
within cortical areas in primates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(36), 15927–15932.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1010356107

Collins, C. E. [Christine E.], Turner, E. C., Sawyer, E. K., Reed, J. L., Young, N. A., Flaherty, D. K., & Kaas, J. H. (2016).
Cortical cell and neuron density estimates in one chimpanzee hemisphere. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(3), 740–745. doi:10.1073/pnas.1524208113

Cook, R. L. (1986). Stochastic sampling in computer graphics. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 5(1), 51–72. doi:10.

1145/7529.8927

Coombes, S., beim Graben, P., Potthast, R., & Wright, J. (Eds.). (2014). Neural fields. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

doi:10.1007/978-3-642-54593-1

13

232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

263

264

265

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

273

274

275

276

277

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

287

288

289

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

Curcio, C. A., Sloan, K. R., Kalina, R. E., & Hendrickson, A. E. (1990). Human photoreceptor topography. The

Journal of Comparative Neurology, 292(4), 497–523. doi:10.1002/cne.902920402

Ebeida, M. S., Awad, M. A., Ge, X., Mahmoud, A. H., Mitchell, S. A., Knupp, P. M., & Wei, L.-Y. (2014). Improving
spatial coverage while preserving the blue noise of point sets. Computer-Aided Design, 46, 25–36. doi:10.
1016/j.cad.2013.08.015

Ercsey-Ravasz, M., Markov, N., Lamy, C., Van Essen, D., Knoblauch, K., Toroczkai, Z., & Kennedy, H. (2013). A
predictive network model of cerebral cortical connectivity based on a distance rule. Neuron, 80(1), 184–197.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.036

Gillies, S. et al. (2007). Shapely: Manipulation and analysis of geometric objects. toblerity.org. Retrieved from

https://github.com/Toblerity/Shapely

Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological theory. New York: Wiley.
Hunter, J. D. (2007). Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing In Science & Engineering, 9(3), 90–95.

doi:10.1109/MCSE.2007.55

Ivenshitz, M. & Segal, M. (2010). Neuronal density determines network connectivity and spontaneous activity in
cultured hippocampus. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104(2), 1052–1060. doi:10.1152/jn.00914.2009
Jiang, X., Shen, S., Cadwell, C. R., Berens, P., Sinz, F., Ecker, A. S., Patel, S., & Tolias, A. S. (2015). Principles of
connectivity among morphologically defined cell types in adult neocortex. Science, 350(6264), aac9462–
aac9462. doi:10.1126/science.aac9462

Jones, E., Oliphant, T., & Peterson, P. (2001). SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python. Retrieved from http:

//www.scipy.org

Lagae, A. & Dutr´e, P. (2008). A comparison of methods for generating poisson disk distributions. Computer Graph-

ics Forum, 27(1), 114–129. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8659.2007.01100.x

Lloyd, S. (1982). Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 28(2), 129–137.

doi:10.1109/tit.1982.1056489

Markov, N. T., Ercsey-Ravasz, M., Lamy, C., Gomes, A. R. R., Magrou, L., Misery, P., Giroud, P., Barone, P., Dehay,
C., Toroczkai, Z., Knoblauch, K., Essen, D. C. V., & Kennedy, H. (2013). The role of long-range connec-
tions on the specificity of the macaque interareal cortical network. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 110(13), 5187–5192. doi:10.1073/pnas.1218972110

McCormick, B., DeVaul, R., Shankle, W., & Fallon, J. (2000). Modeling neuron spatial distribution and morphology
in the developing human cerebral cortex. Neurocomputing, 32-33, 897–904. doi:10 . 1016 / s0925 - 2312(00 )
00258-7

Mehta, S. U., Wang, B., & Ramamoorthi, R. (2012). Axis-aligned filtering for interactive sampled soft shadows.

ACM Transactions on Graphics, 31(6), 1. doi:10.1145/2366145.2366182

Nallapu, B. T., Surampudi, B. R., & Rougier, N. P. (2017). The art of scaling up : A computational account on
action selection in basal ganglia. In 2017 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN). IEEE.
doi:10.1109/ijcnn.2017.7965835

Pasternak, J. F. & Woolsey, T. A. (1975). The number, size and spatial distribution of neurons in lamina IV of the
mouse SmI neocortex. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 160(3), 291–306. doi:10.1002/cne.901600303
Potjans, T. C. & Diesmann, M. (2012). The cell-type specific cortical microcircuit: Relating structure and activity
in a full-scale spiking network model. Cerebral Cortex, 24(3), 785–806. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhs358
Pyka, M., Klatt, S., & Cheng, S. (2014). Parametric anatomical modeling: A method for modeling the anatomical
layout of neurons and their projections. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy, 8. doi:10.3389/fnana.2014.00091

Rougier, N. P. (2017). [Re] Weighted Voronoi Stippling. ReScience, 3(1). doi:10.5281/zenodo.802285
Rougier, N. P. (2018). A density-driven method for the placement of biological cells over two-dimensional mani-

folds: Code. doi:10.5281/zenodo.1172461

Schneider, C. J., Cuntz, H., & Soltesz, I. (2014). Linking macroscopic with microscopic neuroanatomy using syn-
thetic neuronal populations. PLoS Computational Biology, 10(10), e1003921. doi:10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi .
1003921

Secord, A. (2002). Weighted voronoi stippling. In Proceedings of the second international symposium on non-

photorealistic animation and rendering - NPAR ’02. ACM Press. doi:10.1145/508530.508537

Ulichney, R. (1987). Digital halftoning. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.
van der Walt, S., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. (2011). The NumPy array: A structure for efficient numerical

computation. Computing in Science & Engineering, 13(2), 22–30. doi:10.1109/mcse.2011.37

Wilson, H. R. & Cowan, J. D. (1972). Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in localized populations of model

neurons. Biophysical Journal, 12(1), 1–24. doi:10.1016/s0006-3495(72)86068-5

Wilson, H. R. & Cowan, J. D. (1973). A mathematical theory of the functional dynamics of cortical and thalamic

nervous tissue. Kybernetik, 13(2), 55–80. doi:10.1007/bf00288786

14

Young, N. A., Collins, C. E. [Christine E.], & Kaas, J. H. (2013). Cell and neuron densities in the primary motor

cortex of primates. Frontiers in Neural Circuits, 7. doi:10.3389/fncir.2013.00030

Zhang, S., Guo, J., Zhang, H., Jia, X., Yan, D.-M., Yong, J., & Wonka, P. (2016). Capacity constrained blue-noise

sampling on surfaces. Computers & Graphics, 55, 44–54. doi:10.1016/j.cag.2015.11.002

317

318

319

320

15

