Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education
Margarida Romero, Jonathan Reyes, Panos Kostakos

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Jonathan Reyes, Panos Kostakos. Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher
Education. Alex Urmeneta; Margarida Romero. Creative Applications of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, Springer Nature Switzerland, pp.129-143, 2024, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture,
978-3-031-55271-7. ￿10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_10￿. ￿hal-04593580￿

HAL Id: hal-04593580

https://hal.science/hal-04593580

Submitted on 30 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

10 

Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher 
Education 

Margarida Romero, Jonathan Reyes, and Panos Kostakos 

Abstract Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GAI) has become popular 
recently with the advances in text and image generation tools (e.g., 
ChatGPT) that are easy to use for the general public. The emergence 
of GAI has sparked a surge in academic studies within higher educa-
tion (HE) but also raised concerns about the changes related to policy 
making. This chapter analyses the impact of GAI on HE, addressing 
its uses 
learning, chatbot applications, and responsible 
AI implementation. Evaluating both its beneﬁts and limitations, this 
chapter navigates through diverse studies, presenting insights into GAI’s

language 

in 

M. Romero (B) · J. Reyes 
Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France 
e-mail: margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr; margarida.romero@unice.fr 

J. Reyes 
e-mail: Jonathan.REYES-MARIMON@univ-cotedazur.fr 

P. Kostakos 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: panos.kostakos@oulu.ﬁ 

© The Author(s) 2024 
A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in 
Education, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_10 

129

130

M. Romero et al.

potential 
deployment and ethical considerations. 

in education, while emphasising the need for responsible 

Keywords Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GAI) · Higher education · 
ChatBots · Assessment 

Introduction 

Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GAI) was not a popular discussion 
topic among faculty in Higher Education (HE) until the emergence of 
tools such as ChatGPT. Since 2021, the academic discourse both in rela-
tion to policies in the use of AI, but also in relation to the potential 
opportunities of AI for education, has started to rise as a research topic 
(Southworth et al., 2023). Given the widespread availability of generative 
AI tools like ChatGPT, it is imperative for Higher Education Institu-
tions (HEI) to carefully examine the practical applications and possible 
difﬁculties of AI for both professors and students. Although we must 
acknowledge the potential applications of AI, it is crucial to address the 
issue of regulating its use in the context of university work undertaken by 
undergraduate and graduate students. Rudolph et al. (2023) point to the 
challenges facing HE institutions that continue to use traditional assess-
ment strategies when the availability of tools such as ChatGPT makes it 
difﬁcult to evaluate the originality of student work. Conversely, AI can 
be used to scaffold student learning and create more personalised HE 
experiences. 

GAI typically refers to advanced technology that 

integrates deep 
learning models, trained on extensive datasets, gathered from various 
public sources, user-generated content, licensed third-party data, and 
information created by human reviewers (OpenAI, 2023). This tech-
nology processes human 
generates outputs that closely mimic human-generated content, predom-
inantly in the form of text and images (Lim et al., 2023). Due to their 
large scale, software developers building these tools utilise models that 
frequently lack direct insights about the quality and type of data used 
for training. Additionally, they are often unable to meet data retention 
or privacy requirements given their inability to store these data models

inputs, commonly known as prompts

, and 

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

131

in their independent computing environments. Hence, similar to using a 
search engine, a typical user currently relies on remote server interactions 
when exchanging data through AGI tools. This raises signiﬁcant concerns 
regarding privacy and the potential for information leakage. This issue 
is particularly acute with AGI tools like ChatGPT, which require more 
detailed text input, in contrast to typical search engines that respond to 
relatively brief search queries. 

In this chapter, we address these different domains by analysing the 
uses of AI in HE, with a special focus on generative AI. The second 
section addresses AI for language learning and translation in HE. The 
third section explores the use of conversational agents (i.e., chatbots) at 
the university level, while the last section addresses the responsible uses 
of AI in HE with a special focus on the role of assessments. 

Uses of AI in Higher Education 

Intelligence 

integrating GAI 

literature review, Baidoo-Anu and Ansah focused on 
In their 2023 
General Artiﬁcial 
(GAI) and education-related papers 
published in English-language, peer-reviewed journals. The review aimed 
to achieve two primary objectives: to evaluate the various methods of 
interacting with ChatGPT, and to discern the advantages and disad-
vantages of 
into educational practices. Within this 
framework, the authors introduced a typology categorising the observed 
beneﬁts of employing GAI in education, encompassing areas such as 
personalised tutoring, Automated Steady Grading (AGS), language trans-
lation, interactive learning, and adaptive learning. Simultaneously, the 
review outlined a series of limitations associated with these AI applica-
tions, including the lack of human interaction, limited understanding of 
the technology, potential biases in training data sets, lack of creativity, 
dependency on the data available or generated for AI training, lack of 
contextual understanding, limited ability to personalise instruction, and 
privacy concerns. This detailed exploration of both beneﬁts and limi-
tations contributes to a more nuanced understanding of the impact of 
General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GAI) in the realm of HE andragogy.

132

M. Romero et al.

is conducted through a self-study approach as 

Several exploratory studies have applied prompt engineering (Lee 
et al., 2023) to more effectively examine how the GPT-3.5 model 
aligns with educational objectives and its suitability for such purposes. 
The primary methodology involves analysing the model’s responses and 
evaluating their congruence with educational objectives. This assess-
introduced by 
ment 
Hamilton et al. (2009). Cooper (2023) utilised ChatGPT by presenting 
it with a series of questions designed to elicit responses providing prac-
tical guidance for teachers on classroom applications. Findings suggest 
that ChatGPT performs well in generating teaching units, rubrics, and 
quizzes. Additionally, the results indicate that ChatGPT can aid educa-
tors in the creation of science education units structured around the 5Es 
model (Engage, Explore, Explain, Elaborate, Evaluate), thereby assisting 
in the transition from initial ideas to fully developed educational units. 
Similarly, Qadir (2023) examined ChatGPT’s role in engineering 
education, underscoring its potential as a generative AI tool across tech-
nically demanding educational settings. The research employs structured 
prompts as a method for eliciting detailed AI responses that facili-
tate various real-life educational applications. Although not based on a 
speciﬁc pedagogical framework, the study provides empirical evidence 
of ChatGPT’s utility in engineering education. Its applications span 
technical subjects like coding and mathematics, creative writing, virtual 
tutoring, personalised learning, test preparation, and language learning. 
Conversely, some of the disadvantages include the lack of human inter-
action in providing personalised feedback to learners. Moreover, as the 
study involved an older model of ChatGPT (i.e., GPT-3.5 architecture), 
concerns regarding reliability, plagiarism, and hallucinative misinfor-
mation were noted as potential shortcomings when using automated 
feedback. The paper also emphasises the growing importance of prior 
knowledge and critical thinking, given their 
in creating 
prompts that generate quality responses. 

importance 

Chan (2023) has studied the use of text-generative AI technologies in 
Hong Kong universities to develop a framework for the integration of 
AI into education. The study engaged 457 students and 180 faculty and 
staff members. Chan has identiﬁed three dimensions: the pedagogical 
dimension, the governance dimension, and the operational dimension

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

133

in the integration of AI in higher education. Within the context of 
HE andragogy, Chan’s framework (2023) highlights the importance of 
reengineering the assessment process given the innovative methodologies 
made possible through the use of AI. In this sense, both the automatic 
analysis, as well as the exploitation of learning analytics for assessment 
purposes (Ouyang et al., 2023) were examined. Similarly, the pedagog-
ical dimension is also where Chan stresses the importance of developing 
the transversal competencies considered critical for future success in the 
innovation economy (Septiani et al., 2023). 

Within the governance dimension, senior leadership plays a pivotal role 
in addressing the complex considerations related to AI implementation 
in education. This encompasses strategies to understand, identify, and 
prevent academic misconduct and ethical dilemmas facilitated by AI, 
as well as the establishment of robust policies and protocols for data 
privacy, transparency, accountability, and security in AI usage. In this 
sense, the AI Act, developed at the European level, aims to develop 
trustworthy AI (Laux et al., 2023). The AI Act postulates different 
requirements for ‘trustworthy’ AI: human agency and oversight, tech-
nical robustness and safety, privacy and data governance, transparency, 
diversity, accountability, non-discrimination and fairness, societal and 
environmental well-being, and accountability (EC, 2019). Furthermore, 
the governance dimension extends to AI attribution and the clear deﬁni-
tion of roles and responsibilities for the technology’s implementation and 
management, thereby ensuring accountability for its ethical use within 
the institution. Equally signiﬁcant is the commitment to ensuring equity 
in access to AI technologies, achieved through implementing measures 
that guarantee fair and inclusive access to AI resources for all students 
and faculty, while also addressing potential disparities in AI utilisation 
across different demographic groups. 

involving teaching and 

The operational dimension, 

learning stake-
holders as well as IT staff, centres on the practical aspects of AI 
implementation in university settings. This includes establishing robust 
monitoring mechanisms to assess the effectiveness of AI integration 
and continuously evaluating 
learning, and 
overall educational outcomes. Moreover, this dimension encompasses 
comprehensive training programmes and ongoing support structures that

impact on teaching, 

its 

134

M. Romero et al.

enhance AI literacy among faculty, staff, and students, while addressing 
the challenges and beneﬁts of proﬁcient AI use across the university. 

Sabzalieva and Valentini’s (2023) guide on the use of generative AI in 
HE develops an introduction to the technology and provides different 
use cases as an 
interactive tool fulﬁlling the role of tutor, socratic 
opponent, or even co-designer. 

AI for Language Learning and Translation 

The prevalent use of English 
in research studies, publications, and 
competitive grants at the international level creates an inclusivity barrier, 
not only for faculty and students, but also for administrative staff 
who lack the necessary proﬁciency in English to fully participate in 
the academic process (Ingvarsdóttir & Arnbjörnsdóttir, 2013). This 
linguistic dominance reduces the opportunities and competitiveness of 
non-native English speakers and limits access to learning resources for 
students who lack English ﬂuency. As such, AI translation tools, such 
as Grammarly or Quilbot, can play a pivotal role in facilitating accessi-
bility, but also improving the overall quality of written work, from both a 
grammatical and contextual perspective. Implementing AI-driven trans-
lation tools can reduce language barriers such as in the case of the MSc 
Smart EdTech programme at the Université Côte d’Azur, where most of 
the students and faculty are using English as a second language. With an 
international cohort representing eighteen different countries, the use of 
real-time translation tools during synchronous, online activities helped 
create a more inclusive learning environment for non-ﬂuent, English 
speakers. Similarly, the use of automatic note taking tools has facilitated 
the creation of meeting minutes and made documenting projects easier 
in the context of research initiatives such as the Horizon AugMentor 
project.

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

135

Chatbots in Higher Education 

Expanding from the pioneering work of Eliza (Weizenbaum, 1966), 
acknowledged as the ﬁrst chatbot in academic research, the exploration of 
chatbot-assisted learning environments has progressed signiﬁcantly over 
the last few decades. Nevertheless, it is in recent years that chatbots 
have experienced a substantial surge in both usage scenarios and research 
within the educational realm, reaching a pinnacle in 2023 (Hwang & 
Chang, 2021). The most common application of chatbots in educational 
settings is as a tool used to interact with predeﬁned content learning 
paths, often referred to as guided learning (Akcora et al., 2018). The 
current availability of generative AI chatbot services and chatbot applica-
tion programming interfaces (API) enables educators to add a new layer 
of chatbot capabilities that can support active learning approaches in 
education (Lo., 2023). Chatbots were created to enable natural language 
interaction between humans and computers. As such, chatbots can be 
considered as computer programmes that aim to mimic some aspects of 
human interaction supported by machine conversation systems, virtual 
agents, dialogue systems, and personal assistants all with the goal of 
supporting the end-user (Suhaili et al., 2021). The systematic literature 
review by Okonkwo and Ade-Ibijola (2021) outlines the diverse applica-
tions of chatbots in HE, including teaching and learning (66%), research 
and development (19%), assessment (6%), administration (5%), and 
advisory (4%). 

Integrating chatbots into HE settings enables universities to address 
the speciﬁc uses outlined in the UNESCO table on the use of genera-
tive AI (see Table 10.1). This is possible due to the versatile nature of 
these tools and the adaptive experience they offer to users. Furthermore, 
the ability of chatbots to understand and generate human-like responses, 
known as Natural Language Processing (NLP), creates a more intuitive 
way for students and educators to interact with the tools (Maher et al., 
2020; Rath et al., 2023), while also facilitating the personalisation of 
the learning experience based on individual student needs (Younis et al., 
2023).

The inclusion of NLP capabilities in the training of chatbots has bene-
ﬁted developers and pedagogical staff seeking to personalise their use for

136

M. Romero et al.

Table 10.1 Use of generative AI in higher education according to UNESCO 

Role

Possibility 
engine 

Description

AI generates 

alternative ways of 
expressing an idea 

Socratic 

opponent 

AI acts as an opponent 
or can help develop 
an argument 

Collaboration 

AI helps groups 

coach 

research and solve 
problems together 

Guide on the 

AI acts as a guide to 

side 

navigate physical and 
conceptual spaces 

Example of implementation 

Students write queries in 
ChatGPT and use the 
Regenerate response function 
to examine alternative 
responses 

Students enter prompts into 

ChatGPT following the 
structure of a conversation or 
debate. Teachers can ask 
students to use ChatGPT to 
prepare for discussions 

Working in groups, students use 
ChatGPT to develop their ideas, 
identify resources, and 
complete assignments 
Teachers use ChatGPT to 

generate content for classes/ 
courses (e.g., discussion 
questions) and advice on how 
to support students in learning 
specific concepts 

Personal tutor

AI tutors each student 

ChatGPT provides personalised 

Co-designer

and provides 
immediate and 
actionable feedback 
on their progress 

AI assists in the 

learning design 
process 

feedback to students based on 
learning analytics provided by 
students or teachers (e.g., test 
scores) 

Teachers ask ChatGPT for ideas 
on designing or updating a 
curriculum (e.g., rubrics for 
assessment) and/or 
accomplishing specific learning 
goals (e.g., how to make the 
curriculum more accessible) 

Exploratorium

AI provides tools to 

Teachers provide basic 

research, explore, and 
interpret data 

information to students who 
use ChatGPT to explore the 
topic in more detail. ChatGPT 
can also be used to support 
language learning

(continued)

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

137

Table 10.1 (continued)

Role

Description

Example of implementation

Study buddy

AI helps the student 

reflect on the 
learning material 

Students explain their current 
level of understanding to 
ChatGPT and ask for ways to 
help them study the material. 
ChatGPT could also be used to 
help students prepare for other 
tasks (e.g., job interviews) 

Motivator

AI offers games and 

Teachers or students ask 

challenges to extend 
learning 

Dynamic 
assessor 

AI provides educators 

with a profile of each 
student’s current 
knowledge on a 
particular topic 

ChatGPT for ideas on how to 
extend students’ learning after 
providing a summary of the 
current level of knowledge 
(e.g., quizzes, exercises) 

Students interact with ChatGPT 
in a tutorial-type dialogue in 
order to produce a summary of 
their current state of 
knowledge. This is then shared 
with their teacher/assessor

HE environments. Additional reﬁnements to the personalisation process 
occur during tokenisation,1 where text is converted into smaller units in 
order to make the chatbots more efﬁcient and effective (Bhartiya et al., 
2019). Once trained and generating responses with a high level of reli-
ability, developers continue to monitor the chatbot’s performance and 
provide iterative training to ensure that it is functioning smoothly and 
providing accurate information. Moreover, Tsivitanidou and Ioannou 
(2021) considers the potential of chatbots to support certain types of 
learning scenarios in HE. 

In their guidelines, Chocarro et al. (2023) explain the desirability of 
empowering teaching and administrative staff to effectively use AI, even 
as its use continues to face questions regarding user digital literacy, ethics, 
data privacy, and how these tools impact current pedagogical strategies.

is the process of transforming a sequence of characters 

1 Tokenisation 
into a collection of 
distinct tokens. In the realm of computer science, tokens encompass a variety of elements, 
including words, integers, identiﬁers, special characters, and punctuation marks (Bhartiya et al., 
2019). 

138

M. Romero et al.

It 

is essential that a comprehensive artiﬁcial 

intelligence training 
program for university students and staff includes learning skills related 
to using, developing, and 
is 
crucial at various levels: 

implementing chatbots. This 

inclusion 

– Problem Identiﬁcation: Universities should support the pedagogical 
empowerment and the AI acculturation of operational staff to identify 
opportunities and problems that can be facilitated using chatbots. 
– Theoretical/Practical Framework: Universities should provide assis-
in the creation and development of chatbot-based assisted 

tance 
learning scenarios based on the needs of educators and learners. 

– Ubiquitousness: Universities should ensure that the use of chatbots 
is democratised, widespread, and reﬂective of the latest technological 
and training iterations. 

– Practical use: Universities should assist students in learning the skills 
necessary to seamlessly integrate chatbots into their learning environ-
ment. 

– Assessment: Universities should continuously assess and reﬁne their 
chatbot training models following a holistic set of quality standards. 

When contemplating the implications associated with the develop-
ment and application of chatbots in educational settings, educators have 
the responsibility to consider the role biases play in their usage and 
development. For instance, tokenisation, a key aspect in data processing, 
requires careful attention to mitigate instances of information biases and 
to ensure that the chatbots maintain a pedagogical perspective. Ensuring 
that the tokenisation of data is executed without bias is imperative, as 
it directly impacts the effectiveness, accuracy, fairness, and equity of the 
educational experience as facilitated by the chatbot (Akter et al., 2021). 
Furthermore, educators must advocate for the availability of chatbot 
APIs capable of seamlessly functioning in different languages, thereby 
linguistic diversity (Mogavi 
fostering inclusivity and accommodating 
et al., 2023). 

Finally, the shift in AI chatbots development APIs to no-code and low-
code, especially OpenAI’s GPTs in November 2022 (Lim et al., 2023), 
marks a signiﬁcant milestone in democratising chatbot development for

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

139

education. This shift has a notable impact on the development and 
use of chatbots as it allows individuals to create their own customised 
AI tools without having extensive knowledge of software development 
or programming. In the context of educational use cases, this removes 
many of the signiﬁcant barriers preventing educators from leveraging 
their unique expertise and training in the creation of their own AI tools. 

Responsible Use of Generative AI Tools 
in Academia 

In November 2022, OpenAI made ChatGPT publicly available for free, 
employing the highly advanced GPT-3 model as its backbone Large 
Language model (LLM). By January 2023, OpenAI announced that 
ChatGPT had accumulated over 100 million users, setting a new global 
record as the fastest-growing application to date (Lim et al., 2023). 
The exponential growth of ChatGPT had a signiﬁcant impact on the 
education sector, as students and educators around the world began 
exploring the app’s novel functionalities. Delivered through an intu-
itive and user-friendly chatbot interface, ChatGPT’s text translation, 
question-answering (Q&A), and text generation capabilities introduced 
new opportunities and challenges to modern 
learning and teaching 
values, norms, and methodologies. This development has been met with 
mixed reactions from the educational community, prompting educa-
tional institutions worldwide to establish ad hoc committees of experts 
tasked with revising their ethical frameworks, guidelines, and recommen-
dations concerning the use of Generative AI (GAI) in education and 
pedagogy. 

Russell Group universities provide a comprehensive framework dedi-
cated to promoting the ethical and responsible utilisation of GAI 
tools within academic settings. These institutions are steadfast in their 
commitment to following established guidelines for the ethical use of 
AI tools in education, as outlined by the principles set forth by the 
Russell Group. This commitment involves fostering AI literacy among 
both students and staff and empowering educators as they guide students 
in the effective and responsible use of generative AI tools. Additionally,

140

M. Romero et al.

the Russell Group universities actively engage in reviewing and adapting 
curriculum, teaching methods, and assessment practices to seamlessly 
integrate the ethical use of generative AI and ensure equitable access 
for all. This commitment extends to upholding academic rigour and 
integrity, while also fostering collaboration with other institutions to 
share best practices in response to the evolving technological landscape 
and its educational applications. 

References 

Akcora, D. E., Belli, A., Berardi, M., Casola, S., Di Blas, N., Falletta, S., 
Faraotti, A., Lodi, L., Diaz, D. N., Paolini, P., Renzi, F., & Vannella, F. 
(2018, June 27–30). Conversational support for education. In Artiﬁcial 
intelligence in education: 19th International Conference. AIED 2018, London, 
UK, 2018, Proceedings, Part II 19 (pp. 14–19). Springer. 

Akter, S., McCarthy, G., Sajib, S., Michael, K., Dwivedi, Y. K., D’Ambra, J., & 
Shen, K. N. (2021). Algorithmic bias in data-driven innovation in the age 
of AI. International Journal of Information Management, 60, 102387. 

Baidoo-Anu, D., & Ansah, L. O. (2023). Education in the era of generative 
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI): Understanding the potential beneﬁts of ChatGPT 
in promoting teaching and learning. Journal of AI, 7 (1), 52–62. 

Bhartiya, N., Jangid, N., Jannu, S., Shukla, P., & Chapaneri, R. (2019, July). 
Artiﬁcial neural network based university chatbot system. In 2019 IEEE 
Bombay Section Signature Conference (IBSSC) (pp. 1–6). IEEE. 

Chan, C. K. Y. (2023). A comprehensive AI policy education framework 
for university teaching and learning. International Journal of Educational 
Technology in Higher Education, 20 (1), 38. 

Chocarro, R., Cortiñas, M., & Marcos-Matás, G. (2023). Teachers’ attitudes 
towards chatbots in education: A technology acceptance model approach 
considering the effect of social 
language, bot proactiveness, and users’ 
characteristics. Educational Studies, 49 (2), 295–313. 

Cooper, G. (2023). Examining science education in ChatGPT: An exploratory 
study of generative artiﬁcial intelligence. Journal of Science Education and 
Technology, 32(3), 444–452. 

European Commission. (2019). Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI . https://dig 

ital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

141

Hamilton, M. L., Smith, L., & Worthington, K. (2009). Fitting the method-
ology with the research: An exploration of narrative, self-study and auto-
ethnography. Studying Teacher Education, 4 (1), 17–28. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/17425960801976321 

Hwang, G.-J., & Chang, C.-Y. (2021). A review of opportunities and chal-
lenges of chatbots in education. Interactive Learning Environments. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.1952615 

Ingvarsdóttir, H., & Arnbjörnsdóttir, B. (2013). ELF and academic writing: A 
perspective from the expanding circle. Journal of English as a Lingua Franca, 
2(1), 123–145. 

Laux, J., Wachter, S., & Mittelstadt, B. (2023). Trustworthy artiﬁcial intelli-
gence and the European Union AI act: On the conﬂation of trustworthiness 
and acceptability of risk. Regulation & Governance, 18, 3–32. 

Lee, U., Jung, H., Jeon, Y., Sohn, Y., Hwang, W., Moon, J., & Kim, 
H. (2023). Few-shot is enough: Exploring ChatGPT prompt engineering 
method for automatic question generation in English education. Educa-
tion and Information Technologies, 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-
023-12249-8 

Lim, W. M., Gunasekara, A., Pallant, J. L., Pallant, J. I., & Pechenkina, 
E. (2023). Generative AI and 
future of education: Ragnarök or 
the 
reformation? A paradoxical perspective from management educators. The 
International Journal of Management Education, 21(2), 100790. 

Lo, C. K. (2023). What is the impact of ChatGPT on education? A rapid 
review of the literature. Education Sciences, 13(4), 410. MDPI AG. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/educsci13040410 

Maher, S., Kayte, S., & Nimbhore, S. (2020). Chatbots & its techniques 
using AI: A review. International Journal for Research in Applied Science and 
Engineering Technology, 8(12), 503–508. 

Mogavi, R. H., Deng, C., Kim, J. J., Zhou, P., Kwon, Y. D., Metwally, A. H. 
S., Tlili, A., Bassanelli, S., Bucchiarone, A., Gujar, S., Nacke, L. E., & Hui, 
P. (2023). ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A qualitative study 
exploring early adopters’ utilization and perceptions. Computers in Human 
Behavior: Artiﬁcial Humans, 100027. ISSN 2949-8821. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.chbah.2023.100027 

Okonkwo, C. W., & Ade-Ibijola, A. (2021). Chatbots applications in educa-
tion: A systematic review. Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2, 
100033. 

OpenAI. (2023). Enterprise privacy. OpenAI. Retrieved November 22, 2023 

from https://openai.com/enterprise-privacy

142

M. Romero et al.

Ouyang, F., Wu, M., Zheng, L., Zhang, L., & Jiao, P. (2023). Integration 
of artiﬁcial intelligence performance prediction and learning analytics to 
improve student learning in online engineering course. International Journal 
of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 20 (1), 1–23. 

Qadir, J. (2023). Engineering education in the era of ChatGPT: Promise and 
pitfalls of generative AI for education. In 2023 IEEE global Engineering 
Education Conference (EDUCON) (pp. 1–9). IEEE. 

Rath, S., Pattanayak, A., Tripathy, S., Priyadarshini, S. B. B., Tripathy, A., & 
Tanvi, S. (2023). Prediction of a novel Rule-Based Chatbot Approach 
(RCA) using natural language processing techniques. International Journal 
of Intelligent Systems and Applications in Engineering, 11(3), 318–325. 

Rudolph, J., Tan, S., & Tan, S. (2023). ChatGPT: Bullshit spewer or the end 
of traditional assessments in higher education? Journal of Applied Learning 
and Teaching, 6 (1). 

Sabzalieva, E., & Valentini, A. (2023). ChatGPT and artiﬁcial intelligence in 

higher education: Quick start guide. UNESCO. 

Septiani, D. P., Kostakos, P., & Romero, M. (2023, July). Analysis of creative 
engagement in AI tools in education based on the# PPai6 framework. In 
International conference in methodologies and intelligent systems for technology 
enhanced learning (pp. 48–58). Springer. 

Southworth, J., Migliaccio, K., Glover, J., Reed, D., McCarty, C., Brendemuhl, 
J., & Thomas, A. (2023). Developing a model for AI across the curriculum: 
Transforming the higher education landscape via innovation in AI literacy. 
Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 4, 100127. 

Suhaili, S. M., Salim, N., & Jambli, M. N. (2021). Service chatbots: A 

systematic review. Expert Systems with Applications, 184, 115461. 

Tsivitanidou, O., & Ioannou, A. (2021, July). Envisioned pedagogical uses 
of chatbots 
in higher education and perceived beneﬁts and challenges. 
In International conference on human-computer interaction (pp. 230–250). 
Springer. 

Weizenbaum, J. (1966). ELIZA—A computer program for the study of natural 
language communication between man and machine. Communications of the 
ACM, 9 (1), 36–45. 

Younis, H. A., Ruhaiyem, N. I. R., Ghaban, W., Gazem, N. A., & Nasser, 
M. (2023). A systematic literature review on the applications of robots and 
natural language processing in education. Electronics, 12(13), 2864.

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

143

is 

licensed under 

Open Access This chapter 
the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and 
reproduction 
long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons license and indicate if changes were made. 

in any medium or format, as 

terms of 

the 

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons 
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.

