Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open
Educational Resources
Frédéric Alexandre, Marie-Helene Comte, Aurélie Lagarrigue, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Marie-Helene Comte, Aurélie Lagarrigue, Thierry Viéville. Learning Artificial
Intelligence Through Open Educational Resources. Alex Urmeneta; Margarida Romero. Creative
Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Education., pp.35 - 43, 2024, 978-3-031-55272-4. ￿10.1007/978-
3-031-55272-4\_3￿. ￿hal-04582206￿

HAL Id: hal-04582206

https://inria.hal.science/hal-04582206

Submitted on 21 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

3 

Learning Artificial Intelligence Through 
Open Educational Resources 

Frédéric Alexandre, Marie-Helene Comte, 
Aurélie Lagarrigue, and Thierry Viéville 

Abstract This chapter discusses the creation and impact of a Massive 
Open Online Course (MOOC) titled ‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence with Intel-
ligence (IAI)’ aimed at fostering a culture of AI understanding and 
participation in ethical debates. The chapter ﬁrst addresses the rationale 
behind developing the MOOC and the importance of citizen training 
in AI, particularly concerning ethical considerations surrounding algo-
rithmic decision-making. This chapter also emphasises the need to 
reevaluate human intelligence in the broader context of AI advancements 
and probes the transformative nature of AI across various domains of

F. Alexandre (B) 
Mnemosyne team, Inria U. Bordeaux, IMN and CNRS, Talence, France 
e-mail: Frederic.Alexandre@inria.fr 

M.-H. Comte 

A. Lagarrigue 

T. Viéville 

· 

· 

· 

M.-H. Comte 
e-mail: marie-helene.comte@inria.fr 

A. Lagarrigue 
e-mail: aurelie.lagarrigue@inria.fr 

T. Viéville 
e-mail: Thierry.Vieville@inria.fr 

© The Author(s) 2024 
A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in 
Education, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_3 

35

36

F. Alexandre et al.

life. Three perspectives are considered concerning the integration of AI 
in education: adapting the learning experience, using AI as a scientiﬁc 
tool for studying human learning, and critically examining its problems. 
Citizen education is crucial to understanding the scientiﬁc and technical 
elements of AI, especially in the context of algorithmic decision-making 
ethics. The chapter’s focus on AI and citizen education is key. It empha-
sises the need for critical thinking to understand how AI technologies 
affect daily life. The chapter advocates AI training to help people under-
stand how AI works and generate informed opinions about its potential 
and limitations. 

Keywords AI literacy · Citizen education · MOOC · Online learning · 
Ethics 

Introduction 

AI in education can be approached from three parallel perspectives. First, 
it can be used to adapt the learning experience by designing tools that 
take into account different learner characteristics or the digital learning 
analytics resulting from their interaction with systems. Such systems 
could have the potential to support some teachers’ tasks and allow them 
to intervene in more complex aspects of student learning. Secondly, AI 
can be used as a scientiﬁc tool to better understand human learning 
phenomena, by modelling the learner. Finally, AI can be considered 
from a critical perspective. This chapter presents these three complimen-
tary, but not mutually exclusive, perspectives to better understand the 
challenges of AI in an educational setting. 

The latest research combining education and digital sciences makes it 
possible to understand the potential and limitations of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence (AI) 
in the education domain. This research highlights the 
potential for designing AI systems that can enhance their learning capa-
bilities and foster critical thinking (Roux et al., 2020; Viéville, 2019). 
Furthermore, it underscores AI’s capacity, as an instructive entity, to 
understand the intricacies of human learning as well as its ability to 
build more proﬁcient users of these ubiquitous tools (Viéville & Guitton, 
2020).

3 Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open …

37

AI as an Adaptive Learning Tool 

Learning can be made adaptive through the use of algorithms that 
analyse student learning analytics, such as quiz results or software usage 
data, to adapt to individual learners by modifying difﬁculty levels or 
curating content. Other adaptive systems can be made using external 
cameras or brain–computer interfaces, which allow algorithms to further 
analyse behaviour through sensors. This principle of adaptation is at the 
heart of digital pedagogy and is often integrated alongside gamiﬁcation 
strategies where the learner participates in an educational game either 
solo or in collaboration with other learners (Giraudon et al., 2020). 

The KidLearn Project offers a variety of learning activities whose 
multiple variants involve the addition or subtraction of whole or decimal 
numbers designed and implemented by mathematical didacticians. These 
variants are organised in the form of a graph of increasing difﬁculty, 
respecting Vygotsky’s concept of the proximal zone of development 
(Vygotsky, 1978). This concept posits that optimal learning, as evidenced 
by a student’s performance over time, occurs in a zone that is neither too 
challenging, which can lead to discouragement, nor too easy, which can 
result in boredom. In a similar fashion, this concept can be applied util-
ising algorithms that automatically adapt to the learner. These elements 
can be integrated into the algorithm, which will automatically adapt to 
the learner’s progression (Oudeyer et al., 2020). 

While the development of these applications remains limited, the 
ongoing scientiﬁc research provides a crucial stage for initial reﬂection, 
aiding in understanding the processes of knowledge acquisition and 
appropriation. Indeed, to implement this adaptive approach systemati-
cally, it is essential to formalise both the knowledge and know-how, or 
practices, to be taught. This necessitates the explanation and structuring 
of task types and problem-solving techniques. Moreover, it is necessary 
to ensure that the learning process is not burdened with extraneous 
cognitive tasks unrelated to the activity itself. Adaptive learning should 
also occur within a context bound by equipment availability, personnel 
training, and screen usage limitations. 

The positive effects of machine learning are numerous. Primarily, we 
notice that adaptive learning positively enhances learner engagement, as

38

F. Alexandre et al.

diverse interactions with the content provide additional opportunities for 
comprehensive understanding. Indeed, the fact that the difﬁculty level 
of a learning experience can be adapted to an individual learner makes 
it possible to limit or even avoid discouragement or weariness. Also, 
unlike a human, the machine does not ‘judge’, which can help maintain 
the learners’ engagement. However, this type of learning may require a 
substantial effort on the teacher’s behalf if the design does not take into 
account the student’s cognitive load. There is also the risk that students 
may lose sight of the intended learning goals if the gamiﬁcation aspects 
are too prominent. 

Adaptive tools incorporating AI principles should allow teachers to 
devote more time to students who need it most, while the rest of the class 
engages in self-directed learning activities. These tools also allow teachers 
to shift away from traditional knowledge transmission methods, such 
as self-assessed multimedia content and automated training exercises, 
and focus more on other pedagogical approaches such as project-based 
learning. Compared to non-adaptive digital tools, i.e. those without 
machine learning, the degree of autonomous learning can be signiﬁ-
cantly higher and more widely applicable, incorporating comprehensive 
skills development paths. These tools also meet a need in the context 
of distance learning situations and prompt a reevaluation of how school 
work time is currently organised. 

However, it is also crucial to highlight the potential misuse of this 
data: the pervasive tracking and categorisation of learners, the temptation 
to reduce the number of school staff, and the exacerbation of inequali-
ties related to illiteracy (Allemang et al., 2020). Attention should also be 
paid to how these digital learning practices might blend or merge with 
other online behaviours, such as shopping, streaming videos, or reading, 
thereby inﬂuencing or altering their original purposes.

3 Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open …

39

AI as a Model for Understanding Human 
Learning 

learning analytics could 

The ability to collect and interpret 
lead to 
improved learning, whether these metrics are used by the learner or 
by the teacher for self or external regulation (Romero, 2019). The use 
of learning analytics could also make it possible to better understand 
human learning methods in the long term. These learning insights can 
be detected using software by measuring mouse movements or ﬁnger 
clicks, keyboard input, or by sensors used in teaching situations with or 
without a computer (e.g. camera, microphone, accelerometer, or GPS). 
Exploiting these measures requires not only the formalisation of the 
learning task itself but also the modelling of both the task and the learner, 
not holistically, but within the framework of a speciﬁc task. 

The use of learning analytics in digital learning environments makes 
it possible to model the learning task, but also the learner’s activity 
within the task. Machine learning algorithms rely on fairly sophisticated 
models. These mechanisms are not necessarily conﬁned to supervised 
learning, where answers are adjusted from examples provided with the 
solution, but also work by ‘reinforcement’ where the system infers causes 
that explain the positive (called rewards1 ) or negative feedback during 
learning by building an internal model of the task to be performed. 
These models are operational in that they make it possible to create 
effective algorithms that adjust their parameters. One might wonder 
if such models can effectively represent aspects of human learning. In 
neuroscience, these computational models already represent our brain’s 
functional processes as calculations or information processing mecha-
nisms at the neuronal level, thereby augmenting our comprehension of 
such cognitive functions. 

This area of using computer science and AI as formalisation tools 
‘computational education science’ 
to model human 
(Romero et al., 2020), is still in its infancy, but has already revealed its

learning, called 

1 In the context of reinforcement learning, the concept of ‘rewards’ encompasses both positive 
and negative outcomes. This extends beyond the traditional understanding of reinforcement in 
psychology, which typically associates reinforcement with positive outcomes only. 

40

F. Alexandre et al.

potential for the learning sciences. This is why research is carried out in 
a transdisciplinary manner utilising both digital sciences and cognitive 
neurosciences to explore these potentialities. 

AI and Citizen Education 

important to understand that 

In order to ‘master’ the digital technologies in the sense of Giraudon et al. 
(2020) and understand their application (Atlan et al., 2019; Romero, 
2018), it is important to be initiated into the scientiﬁc and technical 
functioning of hardware and software computing objects. In a similar 
fashion, the integration of AI technologies into our daily lives calls for the 
development of critical thinking in young people (Viéville & Guitton, 
2020). 
is 
It 

in AI, the outcome of data 
processing by the algorithms is not solely tied to their programming. 
The desired functions are not implemented only using instructions, but 
also by providing data from which the parameters are adjusted to obtain 
the desired calculation. Depending on the degree of program autonomy, 
there may even be unintended consequences as has been the case in 
chatbot systems that have learned, through poor quality corpora, to 
produce unethical comments on social media. Legally, it is also impor-
tant to be familiar with the implications of interacting with a ‘cobot’ or 
a robotic mechanism in our daily lives. Consider, for example, a medical 
machine whose function would be to help inform therapeutic decision-
making in response to different degrees of urgency. This situation, and 
others like it, stress just how much the chain of responsibility between 
design, construction, installation, conﬁguration, and use is inﬁnitely 
more complex than the behaviour of a non-autonomous machine. 

AI training should help develop the knowledge and skills necessary to 
comprehend how AI works and enable individuals to develop informed 
opinions on the capabilities and limitations of its use. It is in the face of 
these challenges that the MOOC Artiﬁcial Intelligence with Intelligence 
was created as a way to familiarise educators with computer science in 
a non-technical manner and illustrate how AI can contribute to devel-
oping skills (Alexandre et al., 2021). Educational tools exist and continue

3 Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open …

41

Fig. 3.1 An example of an unplugged activity for experimenting with a 
reinforcement learning algorithm 

to be developed that gradually introduce learners to the operation of 
AI. Figure 3.1 shows a minimalist ‘machine’, developed by Pixees and 
built by Snzzur.fr, that utilises blue and red balls to simulate the use of 
algorithms in an ‘unplugged’ game. The game’s construction plans are 
freely available and can be inexpensively reproduced using basic tools. 
It has been established that learning computer science principles in an 
‘unplugged’ way, i.e. removing oneself from machine interactions to 
actively focus on the underlying concepts, makes it easier to understand 
the working mechanisms of AI. 

A Shift in Our Way of Thinking 

Since the beginning of computing, we have seen our way of learning 
and teaching evolve. For example, is it still necessary to learn calcu-
lation when calculators are readily available? While it may be essential 
for understanding arithmetic operations, the need to become proﬁcient 
calculators is lessened in the face of ubiquitous technologies. On the 
other hand, we will always need to calculate orders of magnitude to 
ensure that the calculation is relevant and that we have not made any 
errors when posting or obtaining the result. 

These changes in human activity are found as we automate processes 
that are a matter of human intelligence. When we are content to use AI 
algorithms without seeking to understand their main operating princi-
ples and their implications for our lives, we risk losing individual and 
collective intelligence. We will become reliant on their mechanisms,

42

F. Alexandre et al.

thinking less for ourselves, and developing less of the critical spirit essen-
tial to the formation of autonomous and enlightened citizens. This is 
the whole point of understanding how AI works (Roux et al., 2020). 
If, instead, we seek to understand and master these processes, then the 
possibility of delegating what, in human intelligence, is mechanisable can 
offer us the chance to consciously free ourselves from automaticities in 
order to devote our intelligence to higher-level goals and more humanly 
important issues. 

References 

Alexandre, F., Becker, J., Comte, M. H., Lagarrigue, A., Liblau, R., Romero, 
M., & Viéville, T. (2021). Why, what and how to help each citizen to 
understand artiﬁcial intelligence? KI-Künstliche Intelligenz, 35 (2), 191–199. 
Allemang, D., Gandon, F., & Hendler, J. (2020). Semantic web for the working 
ontologist: Effective modeling for linked data, RDFS, and OWL (3rd ed.). 
Association for Computing Machinery. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02939606, 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3382097. ISBN 978-1-4503-7617-4. 

Atlan, C., Archambault, J. P., Banus, O., Bardeau, F., Blandeau, A., Cois, 
A., Courbin, M., Giraudon, G., Lefèvre, S.-C., Létard, V., Masse, B., 
Masseglia, F., Ninassi, B., de Quatrebarbes, S., Romero, M., Roy, D., & 
Viéville, T. (2019). Apprentissage de la pensée informatique: de la formation 
des enseignant·e·s à la formation de tou·te·s les citoyen·ne·s. Revue de l’EPI. 
Giraudon, G., Guitton, P., Romero, M., Roy, D., & Viéville, T. (2020). 

Éducation et numérique, Déﬁs et enjeux. Inria. 

Oudeyer, P. Y., Clément, B., Roy, D., & Sauzéon, H. (2020). Projet KidLearn: 
Vers une personnalisation motivante des parcours d’apprentissage. Bulletin 
de l’Association Française pour l’Intelligence Artiﬁcielle, 51–55. 

Romero, M. (2018). Développer 

informatique pour démystiﬁer 
la pensée 
l’intelligence artiﬁcielle. 1024, Bulletin de la société informatique de France, 
12, 67–75. 

Romero, M. (2019). Analyser les apprentissages à partir des traces. Distances et 

médiations des savoirs (26). 

Romero, M., Alexandre, F., Viéville, T., & Giraudon, G. (2020). LINE
sciences de 
cerveau de

- Mnémosyne: Des neurosciences computationnelles aux 
la modélisation du 
l’éducation 

computationnelles pour 

3 Learning Artificial Intelligence Through Open …

43

l’apprenant et du contexte de 
l’Association Française pour l’Intelligence Artiﬁcielle, AFIA. 

l’activité d’apprentissage. Bulletin de 

Roux, L., Romero, M., Alexandre, F., & Viéville, T. (2020). Les hauts de 

Otesia. Binaire. 

Viéville, T. (2019). Mais comment éduquer les garçons à l’équité des genres au 
niveau informatique et numérique. Éducation à la mixité: Et les garçons? 
Un rêve pour les ﬁlles et les garçons. La Science. 

Viéville, T., & Guitton, P. (2020). Quels sont les liens entre IA et Éducation? 

Binaire. 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological 

processes. Harvard University Press. 

is 

licensed under 

the Creative 
Open Access This chapter 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and 
long as you give appropriate 
reproduction 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons license and indicate if changes were made. 

in any medium or format, as 

terms of 

the 

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons 
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.

