A dynamical computational model of theta generation in
hippocampal circuits to study theta-gamma oscillations
during neurostimulation
Nikolaos Vardalakis, Amélie Aussel, Nicolas P. Rougier, Fabien B Wagner

To cite this version:

Nikolaos Vardalakis, Amélie Aussel, Nicolas P. Rougier, Fabien B Wagner. A dynamical computa-
tional model of theta generation in hippocampal circuits to study theta-gamma oscillations during
neurostimulation. eLife, In press. ￿hal-04383365￿

HAL Id: hal-04383365

https://inria.hal.science/hal-04383365

Submitted on 9 Jan 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

\*For correspondence:
fabien.wagner@u-bordeaux.fr
(Fabien B. Wagner)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

A dynamical computational model of
theta generation in hippocampal
circuits to study theta-gamma
oscillations during neurostimulation

Nikolaos Vardalakis1,2, Amélie Aussel1,2,3, Nicolas P. Rougier1,2,3, Fabien B.
Wagner1\*

1Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IMN, UMR 5293, F-33000 Bordeaux, France; 2Univ. Bordeaux,
INRIA, IMN, UMR 5293, F-33000 Bordeaux, France; 3Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux
INP, LaBRI, UMR 5800, F-33400 Talence, France

Abstract
Neurostimulation of the hippocampal formation has shown promising results for modulating
memory but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In particular, the effects on
hippocampal theta-nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset, which are both crucial for
memory processes, are unknown. Moreover, these effects cannot be investigated using current
computational models, which consider theta oscillations with a ﬁxed amplitude and phase
velocity. Here, we developed a novel computational model that includes the medial septum,
represented as a set of abstract Kuramoto oscillators producing a dynamical theta rhythm with
phase reset, and the hippocampal formation, composed of biophysically-realistic neurons and
able to generate theta-nested gamma oscillations under theta drive. We showed that, for theta
inputs just below the threshold to induce self-sustained theta-nested gamma oscillations, a single
stimulation pulse could switch the network behavior from non-oscillatory to a state producing
sustained oscillations. Next, we demonstrated that, for a weaker theta input, pulse train
stimulation at the theta frequency could transiently restore seemingly physiological oscillations.
Importantly, the presence of phase reset inﬂuenced whether these two effects depended on the
phase at which stimulation onset was delivered, which has practical implications for designing
neurostimulation protocols that are triggered by the phase of ongoing theta oscillations. This
novel model opens new avenues for studying the effects of neurostimulation on the hippocampal
formation. Furthermore, our hybrid approach that combines different levels of abstraction could
be extended in future work to other neural circuits that produce dynamical brain rhythms.

Introduction
Neurostimulation methods have emerged as promising therapeutic modalities to restore neuro-
logical functions in a broad range of motor and cognitive disorders (Gupta et al., 2023).
In the
context of learning and memory, deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the entorhinal area or hippocam-
pus has been shown to either enhance (Suthana et al., 2012; Suthana and Fried, 2014; Titiz et al.,
2017; Jun et al., 2019) or disrupt (Jacobs et al., 2016; Goyal et al., 2018; Lozano et al., 2016) memory
encoding. These conﬂicting results may originate from differences in experimental protocols and
from a poor understanding of their biophysical underpinnings. Among such mechanisms, the in-

1 of 52

volvement of hippocampal theta oscillations (4-12 Hz) and their interactions with higher-frequency
gamma oscillations (30-120 Hz) in memory-related processes has been reported in multiple studies
(Lisman et al., 2005; de Almeida et al., 2007; Lega et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2017; Malkov et al., 2022;
Abbaspoor et al., 2023). Moreover, the modulation of gamma oscillations by the phase of theta os-
cillations in hippocampal circuits, a phenomenon termed theta-gamma phase-amplitude coupling
(PAC), correlates with the eﬃcacy of memory encoding and retrieval (Jensen and Colgin, 2007; Tort
et al., 2009; Canolty and Knight, 2010; Axmacher et al., 2010; Fell and Axmacher, 2011; Lisman and
Jensen, 2013; Lega et al., 2016). Experimental and computational work on the coupling between
oscillatory rhythms has indicated that it originates from different neural architectures and corre-
lates with a range of behavioral and cognitive functions, enabling the long-range synchronization
of cortical areas and facilitating multi-item encoding in the context of memory (Hyaﬁl et al., 2015).
Neurostimulation protocols that affect these rhythms, such as theta burst stimulation (Titiz
et al., 2017), have also been shown to optimally induce long-term potentiation (LTP) (Larson and
Munkácsy, 2015). Another potential mechanism underlying the effect of hippocampal neurostim-
ulation might be the reset of the phase of theta oscillations in response to exogenous inputs, such
as a novel sensory input or a pulse of electrical stimulation applied to the fornix or perforant path
(Buño et al., 1978; Williams and Givens, 2003). Theta phase reset is known to facilitate LTP (McCart-
ney et al., 2004) and naturally occurs during both encoding and retrieval of associative memories
(Kota et al., 2020). In this context, the design of a computational model that replicates memory-
related theta-gamma oscillations and theta phase reset is of uttermost importance to investigate
the effects of electrical stimulation on the hippocampal formation and possibly optimize neurostim-
ulation protocols for memory improvement.

Models of memory-related theta-gamma oscillations in the hippocampal formation have been
developed across different resolution levels, ranging from abstract mean-ﬁeld approaches (Traub
et al., 1997; Onslow et al., 2014; Segneri et al., 2020) to biophysically-realistic conductance-based
models (Lundqvist et al., 2006; Herman et al., 2013; Aussel et al., 2018). Neural masses, which
represent the mean activity of a neuronal population, can generate gamma oscillations through
reciprocal interactions between an excitatory and inhibitory population (Traub et al., 1997; Onslow
et al., 2014), or even using a self-projecting inhibitory population (Segneri et al., 2020). Under exci-
tatory oscillatory input at theta frequencies, these models are capable of generating theta-nested
gamma oscillations. Similarly, these oscillations can be observed in more complex models of the
hippocampal formation composed of single-compartment excitatory and inhibitory neurons con-
nected through conductance-based synapses following the Hodgkin-Huxley formalism (Hodgkin
and Huxley, 1952), and driven by a ﬁxed oscillatory theta input (Aussel et al., 2018). Theta-nested
gamma oscillations also appear in multi-compartment models of prefrontal cortex activity during
memory retrieval (Lundqvist et al., 2006; Herman et al., 2013). Finally, several models have inves-
tigated the functional link between the hippocampal theta rhythm and memory processes, show-
ing that encoding and retrieval occur at different phases within each theta cycle through phasic
changes in neuronal activity and LTP (e.g., Hasselmo et al. (2002); Cutsuridis et al. (2010)).

In terms of neurostimulation, most computational work has focused on the mechanisms under-
lying DBS of the basal ganglia for motor disorders such as Parkinson’s disease (Rubin and Terman,
2004; Pirini et al., 2009; Mina et al., 2013; Ebert et al., 2014), peripheral nerve stimulation (Rattay
et al., 2003; Kipping and Nogueira, 2022), spinal cord stimulation (Rattay et al., 2000; Capogrosso
et al., 2013), or has remained generic (Basu et al., 2018). However, models investigating neurostim-
ulation of hippocampal circuits are scarce (Hendrickson et al., 2016; Bingham et al., 2018), and do
not take into account the effects on theta-gamma oscillations. For example, a detailed multicom-
partment model of the rat dentate gyrus was able to replicate experimentally recorded local ﬁeld
potentials induced by different electrode placements and pulse amplitudes during stimulation of
the perforant path (Bingham et al., 2018). To model the impact of neurostimulation on neuronal
oscillations, a more abstract formalism based on Kuramoto phase oscillators (Kuramoto, 1984) has
been introduced in the context of Parkinson’s disease and essential tremor, which enabled the de-

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

2 of 52

sign of novel neurostimulation paradigms that enhance or disrupt neuronal synchrony in basal
ganglia circuits (Tass, 2003; Ebert et al., 2014; Asllani et al., 2018; Weerasinghe et al., 2019).

To our knowledge, there is currently no model of the hippocampal formation that is able to
replicate both theta-gamma PAC and theta phase reset during neurostimulation. To investigate
the effects of neurostimulation on hippocampal circuits while taking into account these two mech-
anisms, we modiﬁed an existing biophysical model of the hippocampal formation (Aussel et al.,
2018). In this original model, however, the theta rhythm was considered as an oscillatory input of
ﬁxed amplitude and phase velocity, which is inconsistent with theta phase reset. To circumvent this
limitation, we combined this biophysical model with abstract Kuramoto oscillators that acted as a
dynamical source of theta rhythm, thereby modeling medial septum inputs to the hippocampal for-
mation. This new hybrid dynamical model could generate both theta-nested gamma oscillations
and theta phase reset, following a particular phase response curve (PRC) inspired by experimental
literature (Lengyel et al., 2005; Akam et al., 2012; Torben-Nielsen et al., 2010).

We then leveraged this model to explore the effect of single-pulse and pulse-train stimulation
on theta-gamma oscillations. In the absence of theta input from the medial septum, single-pulse
stimulation produced a transient effect consisting of one or several bursts of activity, depending
on stimulation amplitude. The presence of multiple bursts depended on the single-cell calcium dy-
namics and M-type potassium adaptation current. In the presence of weak theta input, designed
to mimic a pathological state that impairs theta-gamma oscillations, single-pulse stimulation could
produce long-lasting or even persistent activity by switching the network to a highly synchronized
state characterized by theta-nested gamma oscillations. When phase reset was not included in the
model, this effect was more pronounced when the stimulation pulse was delivered at the peak of
the theta rhythm. However, when strong theta reset was considered, the phase at which stimula-
tion was delivered did not inﬂuence the outcome. In the presence of an even weaker theta input,
mimicking a pathological state that completely abolishes theta-gamma oscillations, only pulse train
stimulation could restore physiological theta-gamma oscillations during the stimulation period. As
for the previous results, this effect was phase-dependent only when theta reset was not included.
These results provide a new framework to interpret neurostimulation interventions that inter-
fere with hippocampal oscillations and aim at improving memory function. It can be further ex-
tended to investigate the effects of more complex neurostimulation protocols, and the impact of
stimulation location and amplitude on the observed network dynamics.

Results

A computational model of the hippocampal formation with dynamical theta input
We ﬁrst developed a computational model of hippocampal circuits, able to generate both theta-
nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset. To achieve this, we combined an existing con-
ductance-based model of the hippocampal formation (Aussel et al., 2018) with a set of Kuramoto
phase oscillators (Kuramoto, 1984) that were used to model the dynamical theta input originating
from pacemaker neurons in the medial septum (Wang, 2002) (Figure 1A). Such ensembles of os-
cillators are designed to exhibit a strong phase reset of their collective rhythm in response to a
perturbation (Levnajić and Pikovsky, 2010). The hippocampal model contained excitatory and in-
hibitory neuronal populations in the entorhinal cortex (EC), dentate gyrus (DG), CA3 and CA1 ﬁelds
within a coronal slice of the human hippocampus (Figure 1B-C). The output of the hippocampal
formation (i.e., the activity of CA1 pyramidal neurons) was provided as an input to the Kuramoto
oscillators, simulating the hippocampal-septal projections through the fornix (Williams and Givens,
2003; Nuñez and Buño, 2021; Takeuchi et al., 2021). The oscillations produced by the collective be-
havior of Kuramoto oscillators represented a population average of their activity: highly synchro-
nized and desynchronized states generated respectively high and low amplitude theta oscillations
(Figure 1D). The number of oscillators was chosen so that their synchronization level (i.e., their or-
der parameter) and their frequency distribution were suﬃciently close to their asymptotic behavior

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

3 of 52

for a large number of oscillators (Figure S1).

Biologically, GABAergic neurons from the medial septum project to the EC, CA3, and CA1 ﬁelds
of the hippocampus (Toth et al., 1993; Hajós et al., 2004; Manseau et al., 2008; Hangya et al., 2009;
Unal et al., 2015; Müller and Remy, 2018). Although the respective roles of these different pro-
jections are not fully understood, previous computational studies have suggested that the direct
projection from the medial septum to CA1 is not essential for the production of theta in CA1 micro-
circuits (Mysin et al., 2019). Since our modeling of the medial septum is only used to generate a
dynamic theta rhythm, we opted for a simpliﬁed representation where the medial septum projects
only to the EC, which in turn drives the different subﬁelds of the hippocampus. In our model, Ku-
ramoto oscillators are therefore connected to the EC neurons and they receive projections from
CA1 neurons (see methods for more details).

From a conceptual point of view, our model is thus composed of excitatory-inhibitory (E-I) cir-
cuits connected in series, with a feedback loop going through a population of coupled phase oscil-
lators. In the next sections, we ﬁrst describe the generation of gamma oscillations by individual E-I
circuits (Figure 2), and illustrate their behavior when driven by an oscillatory input such as theta
oscillations (Figure 3). We then present a thorough characterization of the effects of theta input
and stimulation amplitude on theta-nested gamma oscillations (Figure 4 and Figure 5). Finally,
we present some results on the effects of neurostimulation protocols for restoring theta-nested
gamma oscillations in pathological states (Figure 6 and Figure 7).

Generation of gamma oscillations by E-I circuits
It is well-established that a network of interconnected pyramidal neurons and interneurons can
give rise to oscillations in the gamma range, a mechanism termed pyramidal-interneuronal net-
work gamma (PING) (Traub et al., 2004; Onslow et al., 2014; Segneri et al., 2020). This mechanism
has been observed in several optogenetic studies with gradually increasing light intensity (i.e., un-
der a ramp input) affecting multiple different circuits, such as layer 2-3 pyramidal neurons of the
mouse somatosensory cortex (Adesnik and Scanziani, 2010), the CA3 ﬁeld of the hippocampus in
rat in vitro slices (Akam et al., 2012), and in the non-human primate motor cortex (Lu et al., 2015).
In all cases, gamma oscillations emerged above a certain threshold in terms of photostimulation
intensity, and the frequency of these oscillations was either stable or slightly increased when in-
creasing the intensity further. We sought to replicate these ﬁndings with our elementary E-I circuits
composed of single-compartment conductance-based neurons driven by a ramping input current
(Figure 2 and Figure S2). As an example, all the results in this section will be shown for an E-I cir-
cuit that has similar connectivity parameters as the CA1 ﬁeld of the hippocampus in our complete
model (see section "Hippocampal formation: inputs and connectivity" in the methods).

For low input currents provided to both neuronal populations, only the highly-excitable in-
terneurons were activated (Figure 2A). For a suﬃciently high input current (i.e., a strong input that
could overcome the inhibition from the fast-spiking interneurons), the pyramidal neurons started
spiking as well. As the amplitude of the input increased, the activity of the both neuronal popu-
lations became synchronized in the gamma range, asymptotically reaching a frequency of about
60 Hz (Figure 2A bottom panel). Decoupling the populations led to the abolition of gamma oscil-
lations (Figure 2B), as neuronal activity was determined solely by the intrinsic properties of each
cell. Interestingly, when the ramp input was provided solely to the excitatory population, we ob-
served that the activity of the pyramidal neurons preceded the activity of the inhibitory neurons,
while still preserving the emergence of gamma oscillations (Figure S2A). As expected, decoupling
the populations also abolished gamma oscillations, with the excitatory neurons spiking a frequency
determined by their intrinsic properties and the inhibitory population remaining silent (Figure S2B).
To further characterize the intrinsic properties of individual inhibitory and excitatory neurons,
we derived their input-frequency (I-F) curves, which represent the ﬁring rate of individual neurons
in response to a tonic input (Figure S3A). We observed that for certain input amplitudes, the ﬁr-
ing rates of both types of neurons was within the gamma range. Interestingly, in the absence of

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

186

187

188

189

4 of 52

noise, each population could generate by itself gamma oscillations that were purely driven by the
input and determined by the intrinsic properties of the neurons (Figure S3B). Adding stochastic
Gaussian noise in the membrane potential disrupted these artiﬁcial oscillations in decoupled pop-
ulations (Figure S3C). All subsequent simulations were run with similar noise levels to prevent the
emergence of artiﬁcial gamma oscillations.

Another potent way to induce gamma oscillations is to drive fast-spiking inhibitory neurons
using pulsed optogenetic stimulation at gamma frequencies, a strategy that has been used both in
the neocortex (Cardin et al., 2009) and hippocampal CA1 (Iaccarino et al., 2016).
In particular,
Cardin and colleagues systematically investigated the effect of driving either excitatory or fast-
spiking inhibitory neocortical neurons at frequencies between 10 and 200 Hz (Cardin et al., 2009).
They showed that fast-spiking interneurons are preferentially entrained around 40-50 Hz, while ex-
citatory neurons respond better to lower frequencies. To verify the behavior of our model against
these experimental data, we simulated pulsed optogenetic stimulation as an intracellular current
provided to our reduced model of a single E-I circuit. Stimulation was applied at frequencies be-
tween 10 and 200 Hz to excitatory cells only, to inhibitory cells only, or to both at the same time
(Figure S4). The population ﬁring rates were used as a proxy for the local ﬁeld potentials (LFP), and
we computed the relative power in a 10-Hz band centered around the stimulation frequency, simi-
larly to the method proposed in (Cardin et al., 2009). When presented with continuous stimulation
across a range of frequencies in the gamma range, interneurons showed the greatest degree of
gamma power modulation (Figure S4). Furthermore, when the stimulation was delivered to the ex-
citatory population, the relative power around the stimulation frequency dropped signiﬁcantly in
frequencies above 10 Hz, similar to the reported experimental data (Cardin et al., 2009). The main
difference between our simulation results and these experimental data is the speciﬁc frequencies
at which fast-spiking interneurons showed resonance, which was around 40 Hz in the mouse barrel
cortex and around 90 Hz in our model, a fast gamma rhythm. This could be attributed to several fac-
tors, such as differences in the cellular properties between cortical and hippocampal fast-spiking
interneurons, or the differences between the size of the populations and their relevant connectivity
in the cortex and the hippocampus.

Theta-gamma oscillations and theta phase reset under dynamical theta input
Once we validated that our elementary E-I circuits were able to generate gamma oscillations under
an input of suﬃciently high amplitude, we studied the behavior of the whole model when the theta
input was dynamically provided by the Kuramoto oscillators as described above (Figure 1). As in the
original model (Aussel et al., 2018), the input theta rhythm drove the network to produce spiking
activity in the gamma range preferentially around the peak of theta in all excitatory and inhibitory
populations (Figure 3A and Figure S5). Spectrograms of the CA1 population ﬁring rates revealed
that these bursts of activity around each theta peak were characterized by oscillations around 60
Hz (Figure 3A). This was conﬁrmed by power spectral densities, which showed a clear peak at 4
Hz (corresponding to the theta drive) and increases in gamma band activity between 40 and 80
Hz (Figure 3B). To quantify PAC between theta and gamma oscillations, we used the modulation
index (MI) (Tort et al., 2008, 2010), which has been shown to outperform other similar measures
(Hülsemann et al., 2019). However, we discovered that this metric would give erroneous results
in our simulated datasets due to the absence of certain frequency components. To overcome
this limitation and avoid artifacts, uniform noise was added to the ﬁring rates prior to computing
the MI (Figure S6). We ﬁrst visualized the quantiﬁcation of PAC using the comodulogram, which
indicates the MI as a function of two frequencies corresponding to the modulating phase signal
and the modulated amplitude signal. This analysis conﬁrmed that gamma-band signals between
45 and 75 Hz were modulated by lower theta frequencies between 3 and 6 Hz, which we quantiﬁed
by computing a global MI in frequency ranges encompassing theta (3-9 Hz) and gamma (40-80
Hz) (Figure S5B). To reﬁne this analysis, we also computed a similar MI between the amplitude of
various gamma frequencies and the phase of theta, which indicated that oscillations between 40

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

206

207

208

209

210

211

212

213

214

215

216

217

218

219

220

221

222

223

224

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

5 of 52

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

263

264

265

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

273

274

275

276

277

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

287

288

289

and 80 Hz occur preferentially around the peak of theta (Figure 3C and Figure S5B).

Next, we veriﬁed that our model was able to display theta phase reset during single-pulse stim-
ulation (depolarizing pulse, 1-ms duration). This mechanism is tightly linked with the concept of
PRC, which characterizes the phase delay or advancement that follows a single pulse delivered to
an oscillatory system, as a function of the phase at which this input is delivered. Although there
is no direct measurement of the PRC of septal neurons, such characterizations have been per-
formed for individual pyramidal cells in the CA3 and CA1 ﬁelds of the hippocampus (Lengyel et al.,
2005; Kwag and Paulsen, 2009; Akam et al., 2012). These PRCs appear biphasic and show a phase
advancement (respectively delay) for stimuli delivered in the ascending (respectively descending)
slope of theta. We modeled this behavior by a speciﬁc term (which we called the phase response
function) in the general equation of the Kuramoto oscillators (see methods, Equation 1). Impor-
tantly, introducing a phase offset in the phase response function disrupted theta-nested gamma
oscillations (Figure S7), which suggests that the septohippocampal circuitry must be critically tuned
to be able to generate such oscillations. The strength of phase reset could also be adjusted by a
gain that was manually tuned. In the presence of the physiological phase response function and
of a suﬃciently high reset gain, a single stimulation pulse delivered to all excitatory and inhibitory
CA1 neurons could reset the phase of theta to a value close to its peaks (Figure 3A). We computed
the PRC of our simulated data for different stimulation amplitudes and validated that our neuronal
network behaved according to the phase response function set in our Kuramoto oscillators (Fig-
ure 3D). It should be noted that including this phase reset mechanism affected the generated theta
rhythm even in the absence of stimulation, extending the duration of the theta peak and thereby
slowing down the frequency of the generated theta rhythm.

Importantly, our approach is generalizable and can be applied to other models producing theta-
nested gamma oscillations. For instance, we adapted the neural mass model by Onslow and col-
leagues (Onslow et al., 2014), replaced the ﬁxed theta input by a set of Kuramoto oscillators, and
demonstrated that it could also generate theta phase reset in response to single-pulse stimulation
(Figure S8). These results illustrate that the general behavior of our model is not speciﬁc to the
tuning of individual parameters in the conductance-based neurons, but follows general rules that
are captured by the level of abstraction of the Kuramoto formalism.

Overall, we successfully developed a new model of the hippocampal formation able to exhibit
both theta-nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset in response to stimulation. We then
decided to explore further the effects of various stimulation protocols on its dynamics.

Effects of theta input and stimulation amplitudes on theta-gamma oscillations
We investigated the behavior of the model across multiple states of varying septal theta input am-
plitude in response to single-pulse stimulation delivered to CA1. In the absence of theta drive, a
single stimulation pulse elicited either zero or two bursts of spiking activity (depending on stimula-
tion amplitude) separated by about 200 ms (Figure 4A, C). We ﬁrst sought to understand the origin
of this second burst, as it showed that even a single pulse could induce transient periodic activity
around 5 Hz in our model, a frequency within the theta range. A previous model has shown that the
presence of Calcium-Activated Non-speciﬁc cationic (CAN) currents can lead to self-sustained theta
oscillations in the hippocampus (Giovannini et al., 2017). Moreover, this study showed a direct link
between the increased excitation provided by the CAN current and the spike-frequency adaptation
properties of the M-current, directly affecting transitions from an asynchronous low-ﬁring regime
to synchronous bursting. We tested the role of the CAN current in the response to single-pulse
stimulation by completely removing it from our simulations, which abolished the second burst of
activity (Figure 4B). Moreover, the time interval separating the two bursts likely resulted from the
interplay between the depolarizing CAN current and hyperpolarizing M current (Figure 4A).

In the presence of dynamic theta input, the effects of single-pulse stimulation depended both
on theta input amplitude and stimulation amplitude, highlighting different regimes of network ac-
tivity (Figure 5 and Figure S9, Figure S10, Figure S11). For low theta input, theta-nested gamma oscil-

6 of 52

lations were initially absent and could not be induced by stimulation (Figure 5A). At most, the stim-
ulation could only elicit a few bursts of spiking activity that faded away after approximately 250 ms,
similar to the rebound of activity seen in the absence of theta drive. For increasing theta input, the
network switched to an intermediate regime: upon initialization at a state with no spiking activity, it
could be kicked to a state with self-sustained theta-nested gamma oscillations by a single stimula-
tion pulse of suﬃciently high amplitude (Figure 5B). This regime existed for a range of septal theta
inputs located just below the threshold to induce self-sustained theta-gamma oscillations without
additional stimulation, as characterized by the post-stimulation theta power, gamma power, and
theta-gamma PAC (Figure 5D). Removing CAN currents from all areas of the model abolished this
behavior Figure S12, which is interesting given the role of this current in the multistability of EC
neurons (Egorov et al., 2002; Fransén et al., 2006) and in the intrinsic ability of the hippocampus
to generate theta-nested gamma oscillations (Giovannini et al., 2017). For the highest theta input,
the network became able to spontaneously generate theta-nested gamma oscillations, even when
initialized at a state with no spiking activity and without additional neurostimulation Figure 5C.

Neurostimulation for restoring theta-gamma oscillations in pathological states
Based on the above analyses, we considered two pathological states: one with a moderate theta in-
put (i.e., moderately weak projections from the medial septum to the EC) that allowed the initiation
of self-sustained oscillations by single stimulation pulses (Figure 5, point B), and one with a weaker
theta input characterized by the complete absence of self-sustained oscillations even following
transient stimulation (Figure 5, point A). In each case, we sought to assess whether single-pulse
or pulse train stimulation could induce or restore theta-nested gamma oscillations and whether
this effect depended on the phase at which stimulation was delivered (i.e., at the peak or trough of
the theta cycle). We hypothesized that any possible phase relationship would also depend on the
phase reset mechanism. To test this hypothesis, we ran a series of simulations using two different
models: one without phase reset and one with strong phase reset (i.e., the reset gain was set at
the value used in Figure 3).

In the case of a moderate theta input and in the presence of phase reset, delivering a pulse at
either the peak or trough of theta could induce theta-nested gamma oscillations (Figure 6A and 6C).
By contrast, in the absence of phase reset, only stimulation delivered at the peak of theta was able
to induce such oscillations, after some time delay (Figure 6B, D). Quantiﬁcation of these results in
terms of theta power, gamma power, and theta-gamma PAC showed strongly similar responses
between stimulation delivered at the peak or trough of theta with phase reset enabled, similar but
weaker responses with stimulation delivered at the peak of theta with phase reset disabled, and
no response in the case of trough stimulation with phase reset disabled (Figure 6E).

In the case of a weak theta input that completely abolished neuronal oscillations, we delivered
stimulation pulses continuously at a frequency matching that of the underlying theta rhythm for a
duration of 2 s, in order to restore physiological oscillations (Figure 7). The stimulation onset was
timed to either the peak or trough of the ongoing theta cycle. The continuous delivery of pulses
produced similar results as single-pulse stimulation. With phase reset, pulse train stimulation re-
stored theta-nested gamma oscillations within the whole network, irrespective of the phase of
stimulation onset (Figure 7A, C). Notably, stimulation delivered at the trough forced a reset of the
phase of theta rhythm and led to the subsequent delivery of pulses at the peak of theta. Interest-
ingly, in the absence of phase reset, peak-targeted stimulation induced theta-gamma oscillations
in all network areas easily, while trough-targeted stimulation created artiﬁcial bursts that propa-
gated in other areas with diﬃculty, requiring multiple pulses to achieve a fraction of the results
of peak-targeted stimulation (Figure 6B, D). Comparing these simulations based on theta power,
gamma power, and theta-gamma PAC within CA1 (Figure 7E) showed similar albeit less striking dif-
ferences as single-pulse stimulation, possibly because CA1 was driven directly by the stimulation.
Notably, gamma power in the absence of theta phase reset, was higher when utilizing pulse trains.
These differences were even more pronounced in areas other than CA1, as can be seen by the

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

317

318

319

320

321

322

323

324

325

326

327

328

329

330

331

332

333

334

335

336

337

338

339

7 of 52

340

gradual emergence of oscillations for trough stimulation without phase reset (Figure 7D).

341

342

343

344

345

346

347

348

349

350

351

352

353

354

355

356

357

358

359

360

361

362

363

364

365

366

367

368

369

370

371

372

373

374

375

376

377

378

379

380

381

382

383

384

385

386

387

388

Discussion

Highlights
In summary, we have developed a novel computational model to investigate the effects of elec-
trical stimulation on a slice of the hippocampal formation, incorporating two important features
related to memory: theta-nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset. The key innovation
compared to previous models (e.g., Aussel et al. (2018)) is the introduction of a set of abstract Ku-
ramoto oscillators, which represent pacemaker neurons in the medial septum and are interfaced
with biophysically realistic neuronal models in the hippocampus. From a methodological point of
view, this hybrid interfacing between two levels of abstraction represents an innovation in itself
and could be applied to other systems or brain structures that are driven by dynamical rhythms.
The main outcomes reported here relate to the importance of the theta reset mechanism when
examining the effects of neurostimulation on hippocampal oscillations.

A very interesting ﬁnding concerns the behavior of the model in response to single-pulse stim-
ulation for certain values of the theta amplitude (Figure 5). For low theta amplitudes, a single stim-
ulation pulse was capable of switching the network behavior from a state with no spiking activity
to one with prominent theta-nested gamma oscillations. Whether such an effect can be induced
in vivo in the context of memory processes remains an open question. Nevertheless, delivering a
single stimulation pulse bilaterally to the human hippocampus during a memory task is suﬃcient
to impair memory encoding (Lacruz et al., 2010), suggesting that even single-pulse stimulation can
indeed have wide network effects that are behaviorally relevant.

The second main ﬁnding is that the timing of individual stimulation pulses with respect to the
phase of the ongoing theta rhythm matters differently depending on the presence or absence
of phase reset (Figure 6 and Figure 7). Human intracranial stimulation data indicate that the re-
ceptivity of hippocampal circuits to single-pulse stimulation is modulated by the phase of theta
(Lurie et al., 2022). A number of studies have also reported conﬂicting results in terms of memory
outcomes, which could potentially be attributed to the induction of phase reset through stimula-
tion (Suthana et al., 2012; Jacobs et al., 2016). To our knowledge, however, the degree of phase
reset that follows each stimulation pulse remains unknown and should be investigated in future
experimental studies. From a technological point of view, the two regimes with and without phase
reset have opposite predictions concerning the need for closed-loop stimulation protocols that
would trigger stimulation in real-time based on the phase of ongoing theta oscillations. Such phase-
triggered stimulation would be most useful if the phase reset mechanism remains relatively limited.
When this mechanism becomes too strong, regular continuous stimulation appears suﬃcient to
restore physiological theta-gamma oscillations (Figure 7).

It should also be noted that the reset gain in our simulations (Equation 1, gain 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡

) was either
completely turned off or set at a high value, producing a strong effect that always reset the phase
of theta to its peak. In reality, the degree of theta phase reset is dynamic, depending on the en-
vironment and associated task requirements (Rizzuto et al., 2003; Mormann et al., 2005; Jackson
et al., 2008), and may be affected by neurodegenerative disorders that affect the connections be-
tween the hippocampal formation and the medial septum. Importantly, our proposed framework
can simulate intermediate values of the reset gain, which should ideally be ﬁtted to experimental
data in future applications.

Finally, we modeled pathological states by reducing the maximum amplitude of the theta in-
put (Equation 2, gain 𝐺𝜃
) until theta-nested gamma oscillations were impaired or even abolished
(Figure 5). This choice was meant to simulate neurodegeneration in the medial septum, which is
known to be affected in Alzheimer’s disease, leading to oscillatory disruptions (Nelson et al., 2014;
Hampel et al., 2018; Takeuchi et al., 2021). Another possibility would be that neurodegeneration
limits the ability of the septal pacemaker neurons to synchronize, thus producing a weaker col-

8 of 52

lective theta rhythm without affecting the maximum amplitude of individual oscillators. Although
we simulated this change in our model by reducing the synchronization parameter, the effects
on hippocampal oscillations were less pronounced (Figure S12). Linking these different modeling
parameters to experimental biomarkers will be important in future work.

Limitations
Even though we took great care in developing a precise representation of the hippocampal forma-
tion, the resulting model remains a simpliﬁcation that could be further enriched. In particular, we
deliberately modeled only a single theta generator, while multiple intra- and extra-hippocampal
generators are known to co-exist (Kocsis et al., 1999; Hummos and Nair, 2017). We decided to
model septal pacemaker neurons projecting to the EC as the main source of hippocampal theta as
reported in multiple experimental studies (Buzsáki, 2002; Buzsáki et al., 2003; Hangya et al., 2009;
Colgin, 2013). However, experimental ﬁndings and previous models have also proposed that direct
septal inputs are not essential for theta generation (Wang, 2002; Colgin, 2013; Mysin et al., 2019),
but play an important role in phase synchronization of hippocampal neurons. Furthermore, the
model does not account for the connections between the lateral and medial septum and the hip-
pocampus (Takeuchi et al., 2021). These connections include the inhibitory projections from the
lateral to the medial septum and the monosynaptic projections from the hippocampal CA3 ﬁeld to
the lateral septum. An experimental study has highlighted the importance of the lateral septum in
regulating the hippocampal theta rhythm Bender et al. (2015), an area that has not been included
in the model. Speciﬁcally, theta-rhythmic optogenetic stimulation of the axonal projections from
the lateral septum to the hippocampus was shown to entrain theta oscillations and lead to behav-
ioral changes during exploration in transgenic mice. To account for these discrepancies, our model
could be extended by considering more realistic connectivity patterns between the medial / lateral
septum and the hippocampal formation, including glutamatergic, cholinergic, and GABAergic re-
ciprocal connections (Müller and Remy, 2018), or by considering multiple sets of oscillators each
representing one theta generator.

In terms of neuronal cell types, we also made an important simpliﬁcation by considering only
basket cells as the main class of inhibitory interneuron in the whole hippocampal formation. How-
ever, it should be noted that many other types of interneurons exist in the hippocampus and have
been modeled in various works with higher computational complexity (e.g., Bezaire et al. (2016);
Chatzikalymniou et al. (2021)). Among these various interneurons, oriens-lacunosum moleculare
(OLM) neurons in the CA1 ﬁeld have been shown to play a crucial role in synchronizing the activity
of pyramidal neurons at gamma frequencies (Tort et al., 2007), and in generating theta-gamma
PAC (e.g., Neymotin et al. (2011); Ponzi et al. (2023)). Additionally, these cells may contribute to
the formation of speciﬁc phase relationships within CA1 neuronal populations, through the inte-
gration between inputs from the medial septum, the EC, and CA3 (Mysin et al., 2019). Future work
is needed to include more diverse cell types and detailed morphologies modeled through multiple
compartments.

Another limitation of our model concerns synaptic transmission delays, which have been largely
neglected and could affect the phase relationships between the medial septum and different hip-
pocampal subﬁelds. Experimental studies have indeed reported time delays in the population
activities of connected anatomical structures (i.e., from EC to DG) (Mizuseki et al., 2009), with pyra-
midal cells in downstream areas like CA3 and CA1 preferentially ﬁring at different phases of theta
(Dragoi and Buzsáki, 2006). Propagation effects could also depend on the spatial scale of the model.
We also decided to represent only a thin coronal slice of the hippocampal formation, and it re-
mains unclear how an anatomically-accurate model of the whole structure would behave in terms
of propagation of spontaneous and electrically-induced neuronal activity.

Importantly, we did not consider learning through synaptic plasticity, even though such mech-
anisms could drastically modify synaptic conduction for the whole network (Borges et al., 2017).
Even more interestingly, the inclusion of spike-timing-dependent plasticity would enable the inves-

389

390

391

392

393

394

395

396

397

398

399

400

401

402

403

404

405

406

407

408

409

410

411

412

413

414

415

416

417

418

419

420

421

422

423

424

425

426

427

428

429

430

431

432

433

434

435

436

437

438

9 of 52

439

440

441

442

443

444

445

446

447

448

449

450

451

452

453

454

455

456

457

458

459

460

461

462

463

464

465

466

467

468

469

470

471

472

473

474

475

476

477

478

479

480

481

482

483

484

485

486

tigation of stimulation protocols aimed at promoting LTP, such as theta-burst stimulation (Larson
and Munkácsy, 2015). This aspect would be of uttermost importance to make a link with memory
encoding and retrieval processes (Axmacher et al., 2006; Tsanov and Manahan-Vaughan, 2009; Ju-
tras et al., 2013) and with neurostimulation studies for memory improvement (Titiz et al., 2017;
Solomon et al., 2021).

From the point of view of neurostimulation, future work is needed to extend the current model
to a multi-compartment representation of neurites, since axons are known to be preferentially ac-
tivated by extracellular electrical stimulation (Rattay et al., 2003). Speciﬁcally, multi-compartment
cable models have been developed to investigate spike initiation and propagation by modeling
the axon as a series of resistance-capacitance circuits following its trajectory (Rattay et al., 2003;
Joucla and Yvert, 2012; Ashida and Nogueira, 2018). These models are particularly suited to study
the effects of extracellular stimulation, which are non-intuitive and depend as a ﬁrst approxima-
tion on the second spatial derivative of the electrical potential along the cell membrane (Rattay,
1986; Rattay et al., 2003; McIntyre et al., 2004; Rattay et al., 2018). Here, we have modeled electri-
cal stimulation as an intracellular current applied equally across all neurons in the targeted area,
which is extremely simpliﬁed but enables computational tractability. Future developments will fo-
cus on developing an equivalent multicompartment model with realistic axonal trajectories while
making suﬃcient simpliﬁcations to allow for realistic computation times.

Finally, we likened conditions of low theta input to pathological states characteristic of oscil-
lopathies such as Alzheimer’s disease, as these conditions disrupted all aspects of theta-gamma
oscillations in our model: theta power, gamma power, and theta-gamma PAC Figure 5. However,
it should be noted that changes in theta or gamma power in these pathologies are often unclear,
and that the most consistent alteration that has been reported in Alzheimer’s disease is a reduction
of theta-gamma PAC (for review, see Kitchigina (2018)). Future work should explore the effects of
cellular alterations intrinsic to the hippocampal formation and their impact on theta-gamma oscil-
lations.

Outlook
Overall, this new model of the hippocampal formation represents a methodologically innovative
basis to further explore multiple neurostimulation strategies that target hippocampal oscillations.
Moreover, the limitations discussed above represent important avenues for future reﬁnements,
which will require signiﬁcant work to overcome the costs in terms of computational tractability (e.g.,
modeling the whole hippocampus, or using multicompartment models of axonal trajectories and
dendritic trees). Ultimately, such model reﬁnements should allow the investigation of the effects
of extracellular stimulation using charge-balanced biphasic pulses and multipolar electrode con-
ﬁgurations with realistic electrode geometries. Most importantly, we believe that our current work
may also serve as an inspiration for future computational models of oscillopathies (not necessarily
limited to the hippocampus), which could beneﬁt from interfacing abstract sets of synchronizing
oscillators and investigating their interactions with biophysically-realistic neurons.

Materials and Methods

Computational Model
Overall Architecture
We aimed to develop a computational model of the hippocampal formation that is able to generate
theta-nested gamma oscillations and takes into account the dynamic nature of the theta input
from the medial septum, i.e., the reset of the theta phase following strong activity in the perforant
path or fornix (Buño et al., 1978; Williams and Givens, 2003). To this end, we adapted a previous
biophysical model of the human hippocampal formation under ﬁxed sinusoidal input (Aussel et al.,
2018) and interconnected it with an abstract representation of the medial septum, modeled as an
assembly of Kuramoto oscillators (Kuramoto, 1984) (Figure 1).

10 of 52

More precisely, we modeled a 15-mm thick coronal slice of the hippocampal formation which
comprises the DG, the CA3 and CA1 subﬁelds of the hippocampus, and the EC, all populated with
excitatory and inhibitory Hodgkin-Huxley neurons. For the medial septum, we opted for a sim-
pliﬁed representation where the medial septum projects only to the EC, which in turn drives the
different subﬁelds of the hippocampus (see also L142-151). In our model, Kuramoto oscillators
are therefore connected to the EC neurons and they receive projections from CA1 neurons (see
sections below for more details).

Medial septum: Kuramoto Oscillators
The medial septum contains pacemaker neurons (Varga et al., 2008; Hangya et al., 2009) that syn-
chronize with one another and generate a global theta rhythm. In turn, these pacemaker neurons
drive downstream areas that receive projections from the medial septum. Here, we modeled the
entire medial septum neuronal assembly as a set of coupled phase oscillators following the Ku-
ramoto model (Kuramoto, 1984), which generated the driving theta rhythm that was provided to
the hippocampal formation through the EC (Breakspear et al., 2010).

Kuramoto oscillators have also been used to investigate the effects of neurostimulation on
synchronized brain rhythms in the context of Parkinson’s disease or essential tremor (Tass, 2003;
, which
Weerasinghe et al., 2019). Here, each Kuramoto oscillator was described by its phase 𝜃𝑖
evolves over time according to the following equation:

𝑑𝜃𝑖
𝑑𝑡

= 𝜔𝑖 +

𝑘
𝑁

𝑁
∑

𝑗=1

sin(𝜃𝑗 − 𝜃𝑖) + 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑋(𝑡)𝑍(𝜃𝑖)

(1)

denotes the natural frequency of oscillator 𝑖, and is normally distributed around the
The term 𝜔𝑖
center frequency 𝑓0
and with standard deviation 𝜎. The synchronization parameter 𝑘 represents
the coupling strength of the group of oscillators, and 𝑁 is the number of oscillators. Higher values
for the synchronization parameter indicate stronger coupling between pairs of oscillators, thus af-
fecting how fast or slow their phases tend to synchronize. The ﬁnal product 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑋(𝑡)𝑍(𝜃𝑖) is used
to describe the effects of external inputs on the phase of the oscillators. Here, the only external
input originates in the projections from CA1 to the medial septum. It is described by the instanta-
neous ﬁring rate 𝑋(𝑡) of the CA1 excitatory population. 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡
is an arbitrary gain that determines
the strength of the CA1 input to the oscillators. Finally, the function 𝑍(𝜃𝑖) describes how the effects
of CA1 inputs on the oscillators depend on the phase of the ongoing theta rhythm.

The coherence and phase of the driving theta rhythm 𝐼𝜃

were computed using the order pa-
rameter 𝑟 to extract the mean amplitude 𝐴 and the mean phase 𝜙 of the ensemble of Kuramoto
oscillators as follows:

𝑁
∑

𝑒𝑗 𝜃𝑖(𝑡)

𝑟(𝑡)

= 1
𝑁

𝑖=1
𝐴(𝑡) = Re(𝑟)

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

(2)

𝜙(𝑡) = Im(𝑟)
𝐼𝜃(𝑡) = 𝐺𝜃 𝐴(𝑡) cos(𝜙(𝑡))+1
where the mean amplitude 𝐴(𝑡) and the mean phase 𝜙(𝑡) are derived by taking the real and imagi-
nary part of the order parameter respectively, and the output theta rhythm 𝐼𝜃(𝑡) is a rectiﬁed cosine,
that controls the maximum output amplitude (in nA).
multiplied by a gain 𝐺𝜃
To simulate the effect of the projections from CA1 to the medial septum on the phase of the
oscillators, an approximation of the instantaneous ﬁring rate of the CA1 excitatory population was
used as the term 𝑋(𝑡). To obtain the instantaneous ﬁring rate, we convolved the CA1 population
spike train with an exponential kernel using the following equations:

2

487

488

489

490

491

492

493

494

495

496

497

498

499

500

501

502

503

504

505

506

507

508

509

510

511

512

513

514

515

516

517

518

519

520

521

522

523

524

𝑑𝑋
𝑑𝑡

= − 𝑋
𝜏𝐹 𝑅
𝑋𝑡+1 = 𝑋𝑡 + 1

𝑁 𝜏𝐹 𝑅

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

, ∀ 𝑡 ∈ 𝑡𝑆

(3)

11 of 52

Table 1. Full list of the default parameter values for the Kuramoto oscillators.

Parameter

Number of oscillators (𝑁)
Center frequency (𝑓0
)
Standard deviation (𝜎)
Synchronization ratio ( 𝑘
𝑁
Phase reset gain (𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡
)
Peak phase (𝜃𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘
Firing rate time constant (𝜏𝐹 𝑅

)

)

Value

250

6 Hz
0.5 Hz
15

4
0

rad
10 ms

)

525

526

527

528

529

530

531

532

533

534

535

536

537

538

539

540

541

542

543

544

545

546

547

548

549

550

551

552

553

554

555

556

557

determines the exponential decay
where 𝑡𝑆 denotes the ordered set of the spike timings, and 𝜏𝐹 𝑅
of the kernel, which was set to 10 ms to compute population activity (for single neurons, a typical
value is 100 ms) (Gerstner et al., 2014).

Hereafter, we call the term 𝑍(𝜃) the phase response function, to distinguish it from the PRC ob-
tained from experimental data or simulations (see section below "Data Analysis", "Phase Response
Curve"). Brieﬂy, the PRC of an oscillatory system indicates the phase delay or advancement that fol-
lows a single pulse, as a function of the phase at which this input is delivered. The phase response
function 𝑍(𝜃) was chosen to mimic as well as possible experimental PRCs reported in the literature
(Lengyel et al., 2005; Kwag and Paulsen, 2009; Akam et al., 2012). These PRCs appear biphasic and
show a phase advancement (respectively delay) for stimuli delivered in the ascending (respectively
descending) slope of theta. To accurately model this behavior, we used the following equation for
the phase response function, where 𝜃𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘
represents the phase at which the theta rhythm reaches
its maximum and the parameter 𝜙𝑜𝑓 𝑓 𝑠𝑒𝑡

controls the desired phase offset from the peak:

𝑍(𝜃𝑖) = − sin(𝜃𝑖 − (𝜃𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘 + 𝜙𝑜𝑓 𝑓 𝑠𝑒𝑡))

(4)

An overview of the default parameters for the Kuramoto oscillators and the bidirectional connec-
tions between medial septum-hippocampal formation can be found in Table 1.

Hippocampal formation: Hodgkin-Huxley Neurons
The following sections describe in detail how individual neurons and synapses were modeled, and
are adapted from the original work by Aussel and colleagues (Aussel et al., 2018). Neurons were
modeled as conductance-based single compartments, following the Hodgkin-Huxley formalism
(Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952), in line with previous work (Aussel et al., 2022, 2018). The temporal
evolution of the membrane potential of each neuron is described by a differential equation whose
general form reads:

𝐶𝑚

𝑑𝑉𝑚
𝑑𝑡

= −𝐼𝐿 −

∑

𝐼𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙 −

∑

𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙

𝑗∈[𝐸,𝐼]

𝐼𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑗

+ 𝐼𝜃 + 𝐼𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚 + 𝜂

(5)

), fast sodium (𝐼𝑁𝑎

), and low-threshold calcium (𝐼𝐶𝑎

denotes the leakage current. 𝐼𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙

are currents associated with speciﬁc ion channels, namely
𝐼𝐿
) currents, the CAN current (𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑁
)
potassium (𝐼𝐾
) responsible for spike
(Giovannini et al., 2017), and the M-type potassium channel current (𝐼𝑀
represents the
adaptation (Kosenko et al., 2012; Sun and Kapur, 2012; Kwag et al., 2014). 𝐼𝑠𝑦𝑛
currents originating from synaptic inputs to the cell and can be either depolarizing (negative sign)
or hyperpolarizing (positive sign). 𝜂 is a Gaussian random noise term accounting for other external
inputs and synaptic ﬂuctuations. Theta input from the medial septum is modeled as a depolarizing
. Excitatory neurons
current and is denoted by 𝐼𝜃
represent pyramidal cells in EC, CA3, and CA1, and granule cells in DG. They were modeled with 𝐼𝑁𝑎
,
for pyramidal cells. Fast-spiking interneurons
𝐼𝐾
currents. The complete description for all of the above
in all areas were modeled with 𝐼𝑁𝑎

, while electrical stimulation is denoted by 𝐼𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚

currents, with the addition of 𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑁

, and 𝐼𝐶𝑎

, and 𝐼𝑀

and 𝐼𝐾

12 of 52

ionic channels and their corresponding currents can be found in (Giovannini et al., 2017). Leakage
currents followed the following equation:

𝐼𝐿 = (𝑔𝐿 × 𝐴) × (𝑉𝑚 − 𝐸𝐿)

(6)

is the maximum leakage conductance, 𝐴 is the area of the single compartment corre-

where 𝑔𝐿
sponding to the membrane of a neuron, and 𝐸𝐿
Channel currents 𝐼𝐾

, 𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑁

, 𝐼𝑀

obey the following set of equations:

is the reversal potential of the leakage channel.

𝐼𝐾 = 𝑔𝐾 × 𝐴 × 𝑛4 × (𝑉𝑚 − 𝐸𝐾 )
𝐼𝑀 = 𝑔𝑀 × 𝐴 × 𝑝 × (𝑉𝑚 − 𝐸𝑀 )

𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑁 = 𝑔𝐶𝐴𝑁 × 𝐴 × 𝑚2

𝐶𝐴𝑁 × (𝑉𝑚 − 𝐸𝐶𝐴𝑁 )

where 𝑔𝐾
the respective gating variables deﬁned by the following differential equations:

are the maximum conductances for the respective channel, and 𝑛, 𝑝, 𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁

, 𝑔𝐶𝐴𝑁

, 𝑔𝑀

𝑑𝑛
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑝
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁
𝑑𝑡

=

=

=

𝑛∞ − 𝑛
𝜏𝑛
𝑝∞ − 𝑝
𝜏𝑝

𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁,∞ − 𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁
𝜏𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁

(7)

are

(8)

For the potassium and CAN currents, the steady-state values for their corresponding gating vari-
ables 𝑛∞
depend on the following
functions of the transition rate constants:

and their corresponding time constants 𝜏𝐾

and 𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁,∞

and 𝜏𝐶𝐴𝑁

558

559

560

561

562

563

564

565

566

567

𝑛∞ =

𝜏𝑛 =

𝛼𝑛
𝛼𝑛 + 𝛽𝑛
0.2
𝛼𝑛 + 𝛽𝑛

568

The sodium current (𝐼𝑁𝑎

) and calcium current (𝐼𝐶𝑎

𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁,∞ =

𝛼𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁

𝛼𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁

+ 𝛽𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁
0.2
+ 𝛽𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁

𝜏𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁

=

𝛼𝑚𝐶𝐴𝑁
) follow a similar set of equations:

𝐼𝑁𝑎 = 𝑔𝑁𝑎 × 𝐴 × 𝑚3 × ℎ × (𝑉𝑚 − 𝐸𝑁𝑎)
𝐼𝐶𝑎 = 𝑔𝐶𝑎 × 𝐴 × 𝑚2 × ℎ × (𝑉𝑚 − 𝐸𝐶𝑎)

569

with two gating variables 𝑚 and ℎ deﬁned by the following differential equations:

𝑑𝑚
𝑑𝑡

=

𝑚∞ =

𝜏𝑚 =

𝑛∞ − 𝑛
𝜏𝑛
𝛼𝑚
𝛼𝑚 + 𝛽𝑚
0.2
𝛼𝑚 + 𝛽𝑚

𝑑𝑛
𝑑𝑡

=

ℎ∞ =

𝜏ℎ =

𝑛∞ − 𝑛
𝜏𝑛
𝛼ℎ
𝛼ℎ + 𝛽ℎ
0.2
𝛼ℎ + 𝛽ℎ

(9)

(10)

(11)

The gating variable of 𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑁
by:

570

571

depends on the calcium concentration within the neuron ([𝐶𝑎]2+
𝑖

), given

𝑑[𝐶𝑎]2+
𝑑𝑡

𝑖

= 𝛾(𝐼𝐶𝑎) +

([𝐶𝑎]2+

∞ − [𝐶𝑎]2+
𝜏[𝐶𝑎]2+

𝑖

(12)

𝛾(𝐼𝐶𝑎) =

−𝑘𝑢 × 𝐼𝐶𝑎
2 × 𝐹 × 𝑑 × 𝐴

∞ = 0.24 𝑚𝑜𝑙∕𝐿 is the
where 𝜏[𝐶𝑎]2+ = 1𝑠 represents the rate of calcium removal from the cell, [𝐶𝑎]2+
calcium concentration if the calcium channel remains open for a duration of Δ𝑇 → ∞, 𝑘𝑢 = 104 is a
unit conversion constant, 𝐹 is the Faraday constant, and 𝑑 = 1 𝜇𝑚 is the depth at which the calcium
is stored inside the cell.

572

573

574

575

13 of 52

Table 2. Full list of parameter values and expressions for pyramidal neurons

Parameter

Expression

𝐴
𝐶𝑚
𝑔𝐿
𝐸𝐿
𝑔𝐾
𝐸𝐾
𝛼𝑛,𝐾
𝛽𝑛,𝐾
𝑔𝑁𝑎
𝐸𝑁𝑎
𝛼𝑚,𝑁𝑎

𝛽𝑚,𝑁𝑎

𝛼ℎ,𝑁𝑎
𝛽ℎ,𝑁𝑎

𝑔𝑀
𝐸𝑀
𝑝∞
𝜏𝑝

𝑔𝐶𝑎
𝐸𝐶𝑎
𝛼𝑚,𝐶𝑎

𝛽𝑚,𝐶𝑎
𝛼ℎ,𝐶𝑎
𝛽ℎ,𝐶𝑎

𝑔𝐶𝐴𝑁
𝐸𝐶𝐴𝑁

𝛼𝑚,𝐶𝐴𝑁
𝛽𝑚,𝐶𝐴𝑁

𝑉𝑚+40 𝑚𝑉
−1+𝑒−0.02 (𝑉𝑚 +40 𝑚𝑉 )

29.103𝑐𝑚2
1.𝜇𝐹 ∕𝑐𝑚2
0.01𝑚𝑆∕𝑐𝑚2
−70𝑚𝑉
5𝑚𝑆∕𝑐𝑚2
−100𝑚𝑉
−0.032

−1

−(𝑉𝑚 +45 𝑚𝑉 )
40 𝑚𝑉

0.5 𝑒
50𝑚𝑆∕𝑐𝑚2
50𝑚𝑉
−0.32 𝑉𝑚+42 𝑚𝑉
𝑉𝑚 +42 𝑚𝑉
𝑒−
4 𝑚𝑉
0.28 𝑉𝑚+15 𝑚𝑉
𝑉𝑚 +15 𝑚𝑉
𝑒−
5 𝑚𝑉
−1
𝑉𝑚 +38 𝑚𝑉
0.128 𝑒−
18 𝑚𝑉

4

𝑉𝑚 +15 𝑚𝑉
5 𝑚𝑉

1+𝑒−
90𝜇𝑆∕𝑐𝑚2
−100𝑚𝑉
1
1+𝑒−0.01 (𝑉𝑚 +35 𝑚𝑉 )

1
(𝑉𝑚 +35 𝑚𝑉 )
+𝑒−
20 𝑚𝑉

3.3 𝑒
0.1𝑚𝑆∕𝑐𝑚2
120𝑚𝑉
−0.055 𝑉𝑚+27 𝑚𝑉
𝑉𝑚+27 𝑚𝑉
𝑒−
𝑉𝑚 +75 𝑚𝑉
17 𝑚𝑉

−0.94𝑒

17 𝑚𝑉 −1

𝑉𝑚 +13 𝑚𝑉
50 𝑚𝑉

−0.000457𝑒
0.0065
𝑉𝑚 +15 𝑚𝑉
𝑒−
28 𝑚𝑉
25𝜇𝑆∕𝑐𝑚2
−20𝑚𝑉

[𝐶𝑎]2+
𝑖
0.5 𝑚𝑜𝑙∕𝐿

0.0002 𝑒1.4
0.0002 𝑒1.4

(𝑉𝑚 +35 𝑚𝑉 )
20 𝑚𝑉

576

577

578

579

580

581

582

583

584

585

586

587

Noise (𝜂), accounting for random inputs to the network, was simulated as intracellular current
acting on the membrane voltage and following the properties of a Gaussian random variable with
a mean of 0 𝜇𝑉 and a standard deviation of 1000 𝜇𝑉 (𝜂𝐸 ∼ 𝑁(0, 1000) 𝜇𝑉 ) for excitatory neurons and
a mean of 0 𝜇𝑉 and standard deviation of 100 𝜇𝑉 (𝜂𝐼 ∼ 𝑁(0, 100) 𝜇𝑉 ) for inhibitory neurons. The
ratio of 1:10 between the noise terms was adapted from the original work and it accounts for the
higher excitability of the inhibitory neurons as well as the E-I population size ratios.

The original model introduced some parameters representing the vigilance state (i.e., active
wakefulness vs slow-wave sleep). However, the present model only focused on the state of active
wakefulness, since this is when memory-related theta-nested gamma oscillations occur. For all
simulations, the parameters were set so that the network operated in the wakefulness regime in
a healthy hippocampus (Aussel et al., 2018). The full expressions for all the parameters deﬁned
above can be found in Table 2 for pyramidal cells and in Table 3 for interneurons.

14 of 52

Table 3. Full list of parameter values and expressions for interneurons

Parameter

Expression

𝐴
𝐶𝑚
𝑔𝐿
𝐸𝐿
𝑔𝐾
𝐸𝐾
𝛼𝑛,𝐾
𝛽𝑛,𝐾
𝑔𝑁𝑎
𝐸𝑁𝑎
𝛼𝑚,𝑁𝑎
𝛽𝑚,𝑁𝑎
𝛼ℎ,𝑁𝑎
𝛽ℎ,𝑁𝑎

𝑉𝑚+34 𝑚𝑉
1−𝑒−0.1(𝑉𝑚 +34 𝑚𝑉 )
𝑉𝑚+44 𝑚𝑉
80 𝑚𝑉

14.103𝑐𝑚2
1.𝜇𝐹 ∕𝑐𝑚2
0.1𝑚𝑆∕𝑐𝑚2
−65𝑚𝑉
9𝑚𝑆∕𝑐𝑚2
−90𝑚𝑉
0.01
0.125𝑒−
35𝑚𝑆𝑐𝑚2
55𝑚𝑉
0.1
4𝑒−
0.07𝑒−
1
1+𝑒−0.1(𝑉𝑚 +28 𝑚𝑉 )

𝑉𝑚 +58 𝑚𝑉
20 𝑚𝑉

𝑉𝑚+35 𝑚𝑉
1−𝑒−0.1(𝑉𝑚+35 𝑚𝑉 )
𝑉𝑚 +60 𝑚𝑉
18 𝑚𝑉

588

589

590

591

592

593

594

595

596

597

Synaptic Models
Inter-neuronal interactions were modeled as instantaneous AMPA and GABA-A synapses using the
respectively. Synaptic currents were described by the following bi-
synaptic currents 𝐼𝑠𝑦𝑛𝐸
exponential differential equations:

and 𝐼𝑠𝑦𝑛𝐼

𝐼𝑠𝑦𝑛𝐼,𝐸
𝑑𝑔𝐼,𝐸
𝑑𝑡

= 𝑔𝐼,𝐸(𝑉𝑚 − 𝐸𝐼,𝐸)

=

1
𝜏𝑔𝐼,𝐸

(−𝑔𝐼,𝐸 + ℎ𝐼,𝐸)

(13)

1
𝜏ℎ𝐼,𝐸
are the synaptic resting potentials, and 𝜏𝑔𝐼,𝐸

= −ℎ𝐼,𝐸

𝑑ℎ𝐼,𝐸
𝑑𝑡

where 𝐸𝐼,𝐸
are the synaptic time constants of
rise and decay for inhibitory and excitatory neurons respectively. The occurrence of a pre-synaptic
in the post-synaptic neuron by a ﬁxed amount,
spike leads to an increase of the values ℎ𝐼
which depends on the type of synapse and the region (due to the presence of cholinergic effects
described in the initial model). Speciﬁc values for the intra-area and inter-area synaptic connec-
tions are given in Table 4 and Table 5 respectively.

and 𝜏ℎ𝐼,𝐸

or ℎ𝐸

Table 4. A pre-synaptic spike causes an increase in the conductances ℎ𝑒
The values for the intra-area connections are given here. Empty cells indicate no connection between the
populations.

in the post-synaptic neuron.

and ℎ𝑖

E → E

E → I

I → E

I → I

EC
DG
CA3
CA1

20 𝑝𝑆

20 𝑝𝑆
180 𝑝𝑆
20 𝑝𝑆
60 𝑝𝑆

600 𝑝𝑆
1800 𝑝𝑆
600 𝑝𝑆
1800 𝑝𝑆

1800 𝑝𝑆

Hippocampal formation: neuron types and numbers
Each area of the network is comprised of two populations, one excitatory and one inhibitory. Excita-
tory cells in the DG represent granule cells and pyramidal neurons in all other areas. Interneurons
represent basket cells across all areas. The ratio between pyramidal neurons and interneurons

598

599

600

601

15 of 52

Table 5. A pre-synaptic spike causes an increase in the conductances ℎ𝑒
The values for the inter-area connections are given here. Empty cells indicate no connection between the
areas. Recurrent projections are not allowed and are marked with dashes.

in the post-synaptic neuron.

and ℎ𝑖

Source

EC
DG
CA3
CA1

Target

EC

DG

CA3

CA1

-

20 𝑝𝑆
-

60 𝑝𝑆

20 𝑝𝑆
180 𝑝𝑆
-

20 𝑝𝑆

20 𝑝𝑆
-

602

603

604

was directly adapted from Aussel et al. (2018). The ratio between pyramidal neurons and interneu-
rons was kept as a ratio of 10:1 for all areas except the dentate gyrus, where the ratio was 100:1.
The number of neurons per subﬁeld of the hippocampal formation is summarized in Table 6.

Table 6. Number of neurons per subﬁeld of the hippocampal formation, divided by neuron type.

Area

EC
DG
CA3
CA1

𝑁𝐸𝑥𝑐
10,000
10,000
10,000
10,000

𝑁𝐼𝑛ℎ
1,000
100
100
1,000

605

606

607

608

609

610

611

612

613

614

615

616

617

618

619

620

621

622

623

624

625

626

627

628

629

630

631

A two-dimensional simpliﬁed image depicting a coronal slice of the hippocampal formation
(Aussel et al., 2018) was used as a basis for a two-dimensional manifold that was uniformly pop-
ulated by neurons following a density-driven approach (Rougier, 2018). Pyramidal neurons were
uniformly distributed within the stratum pyramidale (or within the stratum granulosum for the den-
tate gyrus) and interneurons were uniformly distributed within the stratum oriens. Initial neuron
positions were drawn from a blue noise distribution and a Voronoi diagram was computed. To ad-
just the positions of the neurons over a centroidal Voronoi diagram, the Lloyd relaxation algorithm
was applied for 1000 iterations. Transitioning from a two-dimensional manifold to a 3D reconstruc-
tion of the hippocampal formation was achieved through the addition of the third coordinate with
values uniformly distributed between 0 and 15 mm.

Hippocampal formation: inputs and connectivity
The hippocampal formation receives most of its external inputs from the EC. Activity from the EC
is projected to all hippocampal subﬁelds, starting with the DG. DG granule cells project onto the
CA3 pyramidal cells via mossy cell ﬁbers. CA3 projects in turn to CA1 via Schaffer collaterals. These
connections form the tri-synaptic pathway. Direct connections from the EC towards the CA3 and
CA1 subﬁelds through the monosynaptic pathway are also considered. Pyramidal neurons from
CA1 project to pyramidal neurons and interneurons in the EC, closing the hippocampal-entorhinal
loop. CA1 pyramidal neurons also project to the medial septum through the fornix. An overview
of the connections between areas is presented in panel B of Figure 1.

In the current model, EC pyramidal neurons and interneurons receive oscillatory theta input
from the medial septum in the form of an excitatory intracellular current as described in Equa-
tion 2 and Equation 5. Projections from CA1 towards the medial septum were modeled as a signal
representing the collective ﬁring rate of the CA1 pyramidal neurons. All connections towards and
from the medial septum are summarized in panels A and B of Figure 1.

Synaptic connectivity between neurons within a region is characterized using a probability 𝑝
and is distance-based, following a Gaussian-like distribution (Equation 14) with a width 𝜎 of 2500𝜇𝑚
deﬁnes the maximum
(excitatory synapses) and 350𝜇𝑚 (inhibitory synapses). The value of 𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎

16 of 52

632

633

probability of connection between two neurons separated by an inﬁnitesimal distance (i.e., for
are given in Table 7.
𝐷 → 0). The maximum values for 𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎

𝑝 = 𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎 exp(−

𝐷2
2𝜎2

)

(14)

634

635

636

637

638

Inter-area connectivity followed a similar Gaussian-like distribution (Equation 15), however,
was computed only across the
only excitatory projections were considered and the distance 𝐷𝑧
z-coordinate. Pyramidal neurons from the source area projected to pyramidal neurons and in-
terneurons in the target area, with connectivity probabilities drawn from the said distribution with
a width 𝜎 of 1000 𝜇𝑚.

𝑝 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛(1, 𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 exp(−

𝐷2
𝑧
2𝜎2

))

(15)

Table 7. Maximum probability of connection (𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎

, Equation 14) between neurons within each region.

Py-Py

Py-Inh

Inh-Py

Inh-Inh

EC
DG
CA3
CA1

0
0
0.56
0

0.37
0.06
0.75
0.28

0.54
0.14
0.75
0.3

0
0
0
0.7

639

640

641

642

643

644

645

646

647

648

649

650

651

652

653

654

655

656

657

658

659

660

661

662

) and inter-area connection strengths (𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟

Tuning input gain and connection strengths: targeted ﬁring rates
) to target an overall os-
We adjusted the input gain (𝐺𝜃
at the driving frequency of the input, i.e., 6 Hz, and a mean ﬁring rate of
cillatory rhythm 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔
each excitatory population 𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑐,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔
also at 6 Hz (meaning that each excitatory cell should spike on
average once per theta cycle). Because of the ratio between excitatory and inhibitory neurons in
the model, this resulted in ﬁring rates of about 60 Hz in inhibitory neurons. These targeted val-
ues were inspired by literature in behaving rodents showing that hippocampal pyramidal neurons
typically ﬁre at rates below 10 Hz, usually between 1 and 2 Hz, and that interneurons ﬁre at rates
between 20 and 80 Hz (Hirase et al., 2001). In practice, the obtained ﬁring rates were constrained
by the simpliﬁcations made in the model.
The mean population ﬁring rate 𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑐

was computed by counting the number of spikes in the
last second of a 3-s simulation run, to avoid edge effects due to the non-physiological initial con-
ditions, and by averaging this number over time and across neurons. The oscillatory frequency
was computed as the mean of the inverse of the timing between all pairs of consecutive peaks
𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐
in the theta rhythm. Finally, the metric used to adjust parameters (input strength and connection
strengths) was calculated as the Euclidean distance between the targeted and obtained ﬁring rate
and oscillatory rate:

√

𝐽 =

(𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑐 − 𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑐,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔)2 + (𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐 − 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔)2

(16)

, Equation 2) and inter-area connection strengths (𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟

Tuning input and connection strengths: detailed procedure
, Equation 15) were se-
The input gain (𝐺𝜃
quentially adjusted using the following heuristics. All simulations were performed for a duration
of 3 s, and the ﬁrst 2 s were excluded from the analysis to avoid edge effects. The network was
initialized with membrane voltages uniformly distributed in the range [−70, −60] mV. Our initial
point was a fully uncoupled model in which all the connection strengths were set to 0. The tuning
procedure was performed in the absence of noise.

17 of 52

Table 8. Inter-area connection strengths (𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟
The same values are used when targeting excitatory and inhibitory populations. Empty cells indicate no
connections. EC: Entorhinal Cortex, DG: Dentate Gyrus.

). The source is always the excitatory population of the subﬁeld.

Source

EC
DG
CA3
CA1

Target

EC

DG

CA3

CA1

-

13.0
-

0.2

0.14
0.14
-

1.1

1.1
-

1. First, we adjusted the amplitude of the theta input to a value that would produce a mean
ﬁring rate of 6 Hz in the excitatory population of the EC. To this end, the input strength was
progressively increased from 0 to 0.5 nA in steps of 0.01 nA, and the value that maximized
our metric was selected.

2. We then adjusted similarly the connection strength from the EC to the DG, increasing it from

0 to 20 in steps of 0.1.

3. We repeated the procedure to jointly tune the connection strengths from EC and DG to CA3,
assuming an equal contribution from these two areas. These two connection strengths were
set to the same value and were increased from 0 to 5 in steps of 0.1.

4. We followed the same procedure to jointly tune the connection strengths from CA3 and EC

to CA1, assuming again an equal contribution from these two areas.

5. The last connection from CA1 to EC was more diﬃcult to tune because it closes the feedback
loop and induces complex dynamics when too strong. To tune it, we temporarily uncoupled
CA1 from all other structures and temporarily added a ﬁxed sinusoidal input at the target
frequency of 6 Hz to both excitatory and inhibitory CA1 neurons. We ﬁrst adjusted this input
amplitude to generate a mean ﬁring rate of about 6 Hz in CA1 excitatory neurons. Next, the
connection strength from CA1 to EC was adjusted to also achieve a mean ﬁring rate of 6 Hz
in EC excitatory neurons.

6. Because EC receives both an external input and feedback from CA1, we assumed that both
these contributions should be decreased for the system to behave in a physiological range
in the presence of the feedback loop. We, therefore, decided to divide by two the connection
strength from CA1 to EC obtained in step 5. All other connection strengths were then set
again to the values tuned in the previous steps, and the temporary external input to CA1 was
removed. The external theta input to the EC was reinstated and tuned again as in step 1.

Following the above procedure, the inter-area synaptic connectivity parameters were set for all
subsequent simulations. The values are summarized in Table 8. Empty cells denote no effective
connectivity.

Numerical Implementation
The model was implemented with the Brian2 libraries for Python (Stimberg et al., 2019) (see Data
availability section for access to the code). Simulations were performed using a timestep of 0.1 ms
and a total simulation duration ranging between 3-10 seconds (depending on the experiment, see
results section). The average time for simulating 1 second for the complete model locally was 10
minutes.

Neural mass model interfaced with Kuramoto oscillators
The neural masses represented in Figure S8 were modeled using the Wilson-Cowan formalism,
with parameters adapted from Onslow et al. (2014). Speciﬁcally, the ﬁring rates of the excitatory
and inhibitory populations were determined by the following equations:

663

664

665

666

667

668

669

670

671

672

673

674

675

676

677

678

679

680

681

682

683

684

685

686

687

688

689

690

691

692

693

694

695

696

697

698

699

18 of 52

𝜏𝐸
𝜏𝐼

𝑑𝐸
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝐼
𝑑𝑡

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

= −𝐸 + 𝑓 (𝑔𝐸𝜃𝐸 + 𝑊𝐸𝐸𝐸 − 𝑊𝐼𝐸𝐼 + 𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝐸(𝑡))
= −𝐼 + 𝑓 (𝑔𝐼 𝜃𝐼 + 𝑊𝐸𝐼 𝐸)

(17)

with the following parameters: 𝜏𝐸 = 𝜏𝐼 = 3.2𝑚𝑠, 𝑔𝐸 = 0.7, 𝑔𝐼 = 0, 𝑊𝐸𝐸 = 4.8, 𝑊𝐸𝐼 = 𝑊𝐼𝐸 = 4, and
𝑊𝐼𝐼 = 0. The sigmoid response function was not modiﬁed from the original work, and was deﬁned
as:

𝑓 (𝑥) =

1
1 + 𝑒−𝛽(𝑥−𝑥𝑚)

(18)

with parameters 𝛽 and 𝑥𝑚
set to 4 and 1 respectively, according to the original model. The Kuramoto
oscillators were modeled according to Equation 1. For these simulations we used a set of 𝑁 = 100
oscillators with a center frequency 𝑓0
of 25, and a strong phase
of 90. Other parameters were kept as previously shown in Table 1. The neural
reset gain 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡
masses were coupled to the Kuramoto oscillators by linking the variable 𝑋(𝑡) in Equation 1 with
the variable 𝐸(𝑡) in Equation 17.

of 4 Hz, a synchronization ratio 𝑘
𝑁

We increased the phase reset gain signiﬁcantly compared to the Hodgkin-Huxley model, as the
Onslow model utilized a sigmoid function with values between 0 and 1, whereas the instantaneous
ﬁring rate of the populations of single-compartment neurons was much higher and therefore had
a stronger phase resetting effect.

Data Analysis
During each simulation, we monitored and exported the following data for subsequent analysis: (i)
spike timings per neuron, (ii) time series of ionic currents, (iii) septal input theta rhythm and phase,
and (iv) time series of electrical stimulation. Theta phase was wrapped between [−𝜋, 𝜋] with a
phase of 0 radians corresponding to the peak of theta rhythm. All PAC analyses were performed
using the TensorPAC toolbox for Python (Combrisson et al., 2020).

Firing rates
To obtain instantaneous ﬁring rates, the corresponding spike trains were binned in 5-ms rectan-
gular windows with a 90% overlap (i.e., consecutive windows were spaced by 0.5 ms). The number
of spikes within each bin was normalized by the bin size and the number of neurons in the group,
yielding instantaneous population ﬁring rates. Where reported (i.e., values 𝜇𝐼
in Figure 3A),
the mean population ﬁring rates within a given time window (typically lasting several seconds) were
computed by binning all spikes in that time window and normalizing by the window width and the
number of neurons in the population.

and 𝜇𝐸

Spectral analyses
Power spectral density (PSD) estimates were calculated based on Welch’s method. The periodo-
gram was computed using 1-s windows with a 90% overlap, yielding a frequency resolution of 1
Hz. The average spectral power within a speciﬁc frequency band was calculated using Simpson’s
rule within the desired frequency band [𝑓𝑙, 𝑓ℎ]. Spectrograms were computed using the short-time
Fourier transform with a sliding Hann window of 100-ms width and 99% overlap, yielding a fre-
quency resolution of 10 Hz.

Modulation Index
The MI (Tort et al., 2008) was used to estimate the degree of PAC between theta and gamma oscil-
lations in the model. To compute the MI, the normalized ﬁring rate traces were band-pass ﬁltered
in the frequency ranges of interest: 3-9 Hz for theta (referred to as the “phase signal”) and 40-80
Hz for gamma (referred to as the “amplitude signal”). Then, the phase and amplitude time series
were extracted from the ﬁltered signals using the Hilbert transform. A histogram of the mean am-
plitude of gamma over the phase of theta was then extracted, using phase bins of 5 degrees. The MI

700

701

702

703

704

705

706

707

708

709

710

711

712

713

714

715

716

717

718

719

720

721

722

723

724

725

726

727

728

729

730

731

732

733

734

735

736

737

738

739

740

19 of 52

was ﬁnally calculated as the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the mean amplitude distribution
and the uniform distribution. A higher MI indicates stronger PAC. For a schematic representation
regarding the computation of the MI, refer to Figure 1 in Tort et al. (2010). These computations
were performed using the provided PreferredPhase and Pac methods from the TensorPAC library
for Python (Combrisson et al., 2020).

Comodulograms
Comodulograms represent the amount of PAC between two ranges of frequencies, used to ex-
tract respectively a phase and an amplitude signal. Speciﬁcally, we computed the MI between 80%
overlapping 1-Hz frequency bands used to compute the phase of the signal (in the theta range),
and 90% overlapping 10-Hz frequency bands used to compute the amplitude of the signal (in the
gamma range). The resulting distribution of MI values was subsequently plotted as heat maps. An
inherent problem with the computation of the MI using simulated data was the lack of frequency
components in some frequency bands. Filtering the data within 1-Hz frequency bands thus created
a ﬂat signal, resulting in high values of the MI despite the absence of modulation. To overcome
this limitation, we added uniform noise to the ﬁring rate signals prior to computing the MI, with an
amplitude of approximately 20% of the maximum instantaneous ﬁring rates. The results with and
without added noise are presented in Figure S6.

Phase dependency of PAC
For a given theta frequency, PAC depends on the phase of the underlying theta oscillation. To
identify this relationship and the theta phase that maximizes coupling, we used the PreferredPhase
function of the TensorPAC toolbox. More precisely, we applied a Hilbert transform to extract the
phase of the theta signal (ﬁring rate band-pass ﬁltered between 3 and 9 Hz) and the amplitude of
the gamma signal band-pass ﬁltered within narrow (10-Hz wide) frequency ranges between 20 and
100 Hz with a 90% overlap. For each narrow gamma range, we binned the amplitude with respect
to the phase in a similar way as in the calculation of the MI. We obtained a vector of the binned
high-frequency amplitudes with respect to the phase of the low-frequency phase, represented as
a polar plot as in Figure 3C.

Phase Response Curves
The PRC of an oscillatory system indicates the phase delay or advancement that follows a single
pulse, as a function of the phase at which this input is delivered. To characterize the PRC of our
computational model, we applied a single stimulation pulse to CA1 across different phases of the
theta rhythm and calculated the resulting change in the theta phase. We split a single theta cycle
into intervals of width 𝜋∕8 radians and applied a single stimulation pulse of a given amplitude.
For each case, we ran two simulations: one with a stimulation pulse and one without. Finally, we
compared the theta phase 2.5 ms post-stimulation and at the same time but in the absence of
stimulation. The resulting values for the phase difference Δ𝜙 were plotted against the stimulation
phase and are presented in Figure 3D for varying stimulation amplitudes.

Acknowledgments
Simulations presented in this paper were carried out using the PlaFRIM experimental testbed, sup-
ported by Inria, CNRS (LABRI and IMB), Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP and Conseil Régional
d’Aquitaine (see https://www.plafrim.fr).

Additional information

Funding
This work was supported by the Bordeaux Neurocampus junior chair program co-funded by the
Région Nouvelle-Aquitaine and the University of Bordeaux Initiative of Excellence (IdEx) (F.B.W.,
Neurocampus junior chair), and the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation

741

742

743

744

745

746

747

748

749

750

751

752

753

754

755

756

757

758

759

760

761

762

763

764

765

766

767

768

769

770

771

772

773

774

775

776

777

778

779

780

781

782

783

784

785

786

20 of 52

787

788

789

790

791

792

793

794

795

796

797

798

799

800

801

802

803

804

805

806

807

808

809

810

811

812

813

814

815

816

817

818

819

820

821

822

823

824

825

826

827

828

829

830

831

832

833

834

program under European Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant agreement N° 101040391 (F.B.W.,
MEMOPROSTHETICS).

Author ORCIDs
Nikolaos Vardalakis: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5436-4091
Amélie Aussel: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0498-2905
Nicolas P. Rougier: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6972-589X
Fabien B. Wagner: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9582-6109

Conﬂicts of interest
The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.

Data availability
All model ﬁles and analysis scripts are available at the following repositories under the GNU Gen-
eral Public License v3.0 license:
ZENODO: https://www.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8354987
GITHUB: https://github.com/NikVard/memstim-hh

References
Abbaspoor S, Hussin AT, Hoffman KL. Theta- and gamma-band oscillatory uncoupling in the macaque hip-
pocampus. eLife. 2023 May; 12:e86548. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.86548, doi: 10.7554/eLife.86548, pub-
lisher: eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd.

Adesnik H, Scanziani M. Lateral competition for cortical space by layer-speciﬁc horizontal circuits. Nature.
2010 Apr; 464(7292):1155–1160. https://www.nature.com/articles/nature08935, doi: 10.1038/nature08935.

Akam T, Oren I, Mantoan L, Ferenczi E, Kullmann DM. Oscillatory dynamics in the hippocampus support dentate
gyrus–CA3 coupling. Nature Neuroscience. 2012 May; 15(5):763–768. http://www.nature.com/articles/nn.
3081, doi: 10.1038/nn.3081.

de Almeida L, Idiart M, Lisman JE. Memory retrieval time and memory capacity of the CA3 network: role of
gamma frequency oscillations. Learning & Memory (Cold Spring Harbor, NY). 2007 Nov; 14(11):795–806. doi:
10.1101/lm.730207.

Ashida G, Nogueira W. Spike-Conducting Integrate-and-Fire Model. eneuro. 2018 Jul; 5(4):ENEURO.0112–
18.2018. https://www.eneuro.org/lookup/doi/10.1523/ENEURO.0112-18.2018, doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0112-
18.2018.

Asllani M, Expert P, Carletti T. A minimally invasive neurostimulation method for controlling abnormal
synchronisation in the neuronal activity. PLOS Computational Biology. 2018 Jul; 14(7):e1006296. https:
//journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006296, doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006296,
publisher: Public Library of Science.

Aussel A, Buhry L, Tyvaert L, Ranta R. A detailed anatomical and mathematical model of the hippocampal
formation for the generation of sharp-wave ripples and theta-nested gamma oscillations.
Journal of Com-
putational Neuroscience. 2018 Dec; 45(3):207–221. http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10827-018-0704-x, doi:
10.1007/s10827-018-0704-x.

Aussel A, Ranta R, Aron O, Colnat-Coulbois S, Maillard L, Buhry L. Cell to network computational model of the
epileptic human hippocampus suggests speciﬁc roles of network and channel dysfunctions in the ictal and in-
terictal oscillations. Journal of Computational Neuroscience. 2022 Nov; 50(4):519–535. doi: 10.1007/s10827-
022-00829-5.

Axmacher N, Henseler MM, Jensen O, Weinreich I, Elger CE, Fell J. Cross-frequency coupling supports multi-item
working memory in the human hippocampus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2010 Feb;
107(7):3228–3233. https://www.pnas.org/content/107/7/3228, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0911531107, publisher:
National Academy of Sciences Section: Biological Sciences.

Axmacher N, Mormann F, Fernández G, Elger CE, Fell J. Memory formation by neuronal synchronization. Brain
Research Reviews. 2006 Aug; 52(1):170–182. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0165017306000099,
doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2006.01.007.

21 of 52

835

836

837

838

839

840

841

842

843

844

845

846

847

848

849

850

851

852

853

854

855

856

857

858

859

860

861

862

863

864

865

866

867

868

869

870

871

872

873

874

875

876

877

878

879

880

881

882

883

884

Basu I, Crocker B, Farnes K, Robertson MM, Paulk AC, Vallejo DI, Dougherty DD, Cash SS, Eskandar EN, Kramer
MM, Widge AS. A neural mass model to predict electrical stimulation evoked responses in human and non-
Journal of Neural Engineering. 2018 Dec; 15(6):066012. https://iopscience.iop.org/
human primate brain.
article/10.1088/1741-2552/aae136, doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aae136.

Bender F, Gorbati M, Cadavieco MC, Denisova N, Gao X, Holman C, Korotkova T, Ponomarenko A. Theta os-
cillations regulate the speed of locomotion via a hippocampus to lateral septum pathway. Nature Commu-
nications. 2015 Oct; 6(1):8521. https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms9521, doi: 10.1038/ncomms9521,
number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

Bezaire MJ, Raikov I, Burk K, Vyas D, Soltesz I. Interneuronal mechanisms of hippocampal theta oscillations in
a full-scale model of the rodent CA1 circuit. eLife. 2016 Dec; 5:e18566. https://elifesciences.org/articles/18566,
doi: 10.7554/eLife.18566.

Bingham CS, Loizos K, Yu GJ, Gilbert A, Bouteiller JMC, Song D, Lazzi G, Berger TW. Model-Based Anal-
ysis of Electrode Placement and Pulse Amplitude for Hippocampal Stimulation.
IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering. 2018 Oct; 65(10):2278–2289. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8269392/, doi:
10.1109/TBME.2018.2791860.

Borges RR, Borges FS, Lameu EL, Batista AM, Iarosz KC, Caldas IL, Antonopoulos CG, Baptista MS. Spike timing-
dependent plasticity induces non-trivial topology in the brain. Neural Networks. 2017 Apr; 88:58–64. https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0893608017300102, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2017.01.010.

Breakspear M, Heitmann S, Daffertshofer A. Generative Models of Cortical Oscillations: Neurobiological Im-
plications of the Kuramoto Model. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2010; 4. https://www.frontiersin.org/
articles/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00190/full, doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00190, publisher: Frontiers.

Buño W, Garcia-Sanchez JL, Garcia-Austt E. Reset of hippocampal rhythmical activities by afferent stimulation.

Brain Research Bulletin. 1978; 3(1):21–28. doi: 10.1016/0361-9230(78)90057-6.

Buzsáki G, Buhl DL, Harris KD, Csicsvari J, Czéh B, Morozov A. Hippocampal network patterns of activity
in the mouse. Neuroscience. 2003 Jan; 116(1):201–211. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306452202006693, doi: 10.1016/S0306-4522(02)00669-3.

Buzsáki G. Theta Oscillations in the Hippocampus. Neuron. 2002 Jan; 33(3):325–340. https://www.sciencedirect.

com/science/article/pii/S089662730200586X, doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00586-X.

Canolty RT, Knight RT.

ences. 2010 Nov; 14(11):506–515.
10.1016/j.tics.2010.09.001.

The functional role of cross-frequency coupling.

Trends in Cognitive Sci-
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1364661310002068, doi:

Capogrosso M, Wenger N, Raspopovic S, Musienko P, Beauparlant J, Bassi Luciani L, Courtine G, Micera S. A
Computational Model for Epidural Electrical Stimulation of Spinal Sensorimotor Circuits. The Journal of Neu-
roscience. 2013 Dec; 33(49):19326–19340. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6618777/, doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1688-13.2013.

Cardin JA, Carlén M, Meletis K, Knoblich U, Zhang F, Deisseroth K, Tsai LH, Moore CI. Driving fast-spiking
cells induces gamma rhythm and controls sensory responses. Nature. 2009 Jun; 459(7247):663–667. https:
//www.nature.com/articles/nature08002, doi: 10.1038/nature08002.

Chatzikalymniou AP, Gumus M, Skinner FK. Linking minimal and detailed models of CA1 microcircuits reveals
how theta rhythms emerge and their frequencies controlled. Hippocampus. 2021 Sep; 31(9):982–1002. doi:
10.1002/hipo.23364.

Colgin LL. Mechanisms and Functions of Theta Rhythms. Annual Review of Neuroscience. 2013; 36(1):295–312.

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-062012-170330, doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-062012-170330.

Combrisson E, Nest T, Brovelli A, Ince RAA, Soto JLP, Guillot A, Jerbi K. Tensorpac: An open-source Python tool-
box for tensor-based phase-amplitude coupling measurement in electrophysiological brain signals. PLOS
Computational Biology. 2020 Oct; 16(10):e1008302. https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1008302, doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008302, publisher: Public Library of Science.

Cutsuridis V, Cobb S, Graham BP. Encoding and retrieval in a model of the hippocampal CA1 microcir-
cuit. Hippocampus. 2010; 20(3):423–446. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/hipo.20661, doi:
10.1002/hipo.20661, \_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/hipo.20661.

22 of 52

885

886

887

888

889

890

891

892

893

894

895

896

897

898

899

900

901

902

903

904

905

906

907

908

909

910

911

912

913

914

915

916

917

918

919

920

921

922

923

924

925

926

927

928

929

930

931

932

933

Dragoi G, Buzsáki G. Temporal encoding of place sequences by hippocampal cell assemblies. Neuron. 2006

Apr; 50(1):145–157. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.02.023.

Ebert M, Hauptmann C, Tass PA. Coordinated reset stimulation in a large-scale model of the STN-GPe circuit.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience. 2014; 8:154. https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fncom.
2014.00154, doi: 10.3389/fncom.2014.00154.

Egorov AV, Hamam BN, Fransén E, Hasselmo ME, Alonso AA. Graded persistent activity in entorhinal cortex neu-
rons. Nature. 2002 Nov; 420(6912):173–178. https://www.nature.com/articles/nature01171, doi: 10.1038/na-
ture01171, number: 6912 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

Fell J, Axmacher N. The role of phase synchronization in memory processes. Nature Reviews Neuroscience.

2011 Feb; 12(2):105–118. http://www.nature.com/articles/nrn2979, doi: 10.1038/nrn2979.

Fransén E, Tahvildari B, Egorov AV, Hasselmo ME, Alonso AA. Mechanism of Graded Persistent Cellular Activity
of Entorhinal Cortex Layer V Neurons. Neuron. 2006 Mar; 49(5):735–746. https://www.cell.com/neuron/
abstract/S0896-6273(06)00092-4, doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.01.036, publisher: Elsevier.

Gerstner W, Kistler WM, Naud R, Paninski L. Neuronal Dynamics: From Single Neurons to Networks and Models

of Cognition. USA: Cambridge University Press; 2014.

Giovannini F, Knauer B, Yoshida M, Buhry L. The CAN-In network: A biologically inspired model for self-
sustained theta oscillations and memory maintenance in the hippocampus. Hippocampus. 2017 Apr;
27(4):450–463. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22704.

Goyal A, Miller J, Watrous AJ, Lee SA, Coffey T, Sperling MR, Sharan A, Worrell G, Berry B, Lega B, Jobst BC, Davis
KA, Inman C, Sheth SA, Wanda PA, Ezzyat Y, Das SR, Stein J, Gorniak R, Jacobs J. Electrical Stimulation in Hip-
pocampus and Entorhinal Cortex Impairs Spatial and Temporal Memory. The Journal of Neuroscience: The
Oﬃcial Journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2018 May; 38(19):4471–4481. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3049-
17.2018.

Gupta A, Vardalakis N, Wagner FB. Neuroprosthetics: from sensorimotor to cognitive disorders. Communica-
tions Biology. 2023 Jan; 6(1):1–17. https://www.nature.com/articles/s42003-022-04390-w, doi: 10.1038/s42003-
022-04390-w, number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

Hajós M, Hoffmann WE, Orbán G, Kiss T, Érdi P. Modulation of septo-hippocampal 𝜃 activity by GABAA receptors:
an experimental and computational approach. Neuroscience. 2004 Jan; 126(3):599–610. https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0306452204002301, doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.03.043.

Hampel H, Mesulam MM, Cuello AC, Farlow MR, Giacobini E, Grossberg GT, Khachaturian AS, Vergallo A, Cavedo
E, Snyder PJ, Khachaturian ZS. The cholinergic system in the pathophysiology and treatment of Alzheimer’s
disease. Brain. 2018 Jul; 141(7):1917–1933. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awy132, doi: 10.1093/brain/awy132.

Hangya B, Borhegyi Z, Szilágyi N, Freund TF, Varga V. GABAergic neurons of the medial septum lead the hip-
pocampal network during theta activity. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Oﬃcial Journal of the Society for
Neuroscience. 2009 Jun; 29(25):8094–8102. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5665-08.2009.

Hasselmo ME, Bodelón C, Wyble BP. A Proposed Function for Hippocampal Theta Rhythm: Separate Phases of
Encoding and Retrieval Enhance Reversal of Prior Learning. Neural Computation. 2002 Apr; 14(4):793–817.
https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/089976602317318965, doi: 10.1162/089976602317318965.

Hendrickson PJ, Yu GJ, Song D, Berger TW. A Million-Plus Neuron Model of the Hippocampal Dentate Gyrus:
IEEE Transactions on
Critical Role for Topography in Determining Spatiotemporal Network Dynamics.
Biomedical Engineering. 2016 Jan; 63(1):199–209. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2015.2445771, conference Name: IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering.

Herman PA, Lundqvist M, Lansner A. Nested theta to gamma oscillations and precise spatiotemporal ﬁring
during memory retrieval in a simulated attractor network. Brain Research. 2013 Nov; 1536:68–87. doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2013.08.002.

Hirase H, Leinekugel X, Czurkó A, Csicsvari J, Buzsáki G. Firing rates of hippocampal neurons are preserved
during subsequent sleep episodes and modiﬁed by novel awake experience. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2001 Jul; 98(16):9386–9390. https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.161274398, doi:
10.1073/pnas.161274398, publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

23 of 52

934

935

936

937

938

939

940

941

942

943

944

945

946

947

948

949

950

951

952

953

954

955

956

957

958

959

960

961

962

963

964

965

966

967

968

969

970

971

972

973

974

975

976

977

978

979

980

981

982

983

984

985

Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and
excitation in nerve. The Journal of Physiology. 1952 Aug; 117(4):500–544. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC1392413/.

Hülsemann MJ, Naumann E, Rasch B. Quantiﬁcation of Phase-Amplitude Coupling in Neuronal Oscilla-
tions: Comparison of Phase-Locking Value, Mean Vector Length, Modulation Index, and Generalized-Linear-
Modeling-Cross-Frequency-Coupling. Frontiers in Neuroscience. 2019; 13. https://www.frontiersin.org/article/
10.3389/fnins.2019.00573.

Hummos A, Nair SS.

PLoS ONE.
2017 Aug; 12(8):e0182648. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5546630/, doi: 10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0182648.

An integrative model of the intrinsic hippocampal theta rhythm.

Hyaﬁl A, Giraud AL, Fontolan L, Gutkin B. Neural Cross-Frequency Coupling: Connecting Architectures, Mech-
anisms, and Functions. Trends in Neurosciences. 2015 Nov; 38(11):725–740. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0166223615002088, doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.09.001.

Iaccarino HF, Singer AC, Martorell AJ, Rudenko A, Gao F, Gillingham TZ, Mathys H, Seo J, Kritskiy O, Abdurrob F,
Adaikkan C, Canter RG, Rueda R, Brown EN, Boyden ES, Tsai LH. Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates
amyloid load and modiﬁes microglia. Nature. 2016 Dec; 540(7632):230–235. https://www.nature.com/articles/
nature20587, doi: 10.1038/nature20587.

Jackson J, Dickson CT, Bland BH. Median Raphe Stimulation Disrupts Hippocampal Theta Via Rapid Inhibition
and State-Dependent Phase Reset of Theta-Related Neural Circuitry. Journal of Neurophysiology. 2008 Jun;
99(6):3009–3026. https://www.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/jn.00065.2008, doi: 10.1152/jn.00065.2008.

Jacobs J, Miller J, Lee SA, Coffey T, Watrous AJ, Sperling MR, Sharan A, Worrell G, Berry B, Lega B, Jobst BC, Davis
K, Gross RE, Sheth SA, Ezzyat Y, Das SR, Stein J, Gorniak R, Kahana MJ, Rizzuto DS. Direct Electrical Stimulation
of the Human Entorhinal Region and Hippocampus Impairs Memory. Neuron. 2016 Dec; 92(5):983–990.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0896627316308364, doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.10.062.

Jensen O, Colgin LL. Cross-frequency coupling between neuronal oscillations.

Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences. 2007 Jul; 11(7):267–269. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661307001271, doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2007.05.003.

Joucla S, Yvert B. Modeling extracellular electrical neural stimulation: From basic understanding to MEA-
based applications. Journal of Physiology-Paris. 2012 May; 106(3-4):146–158. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0928425711000416, doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2011.10.003.

Jun S, Kim JS, Chung CK. Direct Stimulation of Human Hippocampus During Verbal Associative Encoding
Enhances Subsequent Memory Recollection. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2019 Feb; 13:23. https:
//www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00023/full, doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00023.

Jutras MJ, Fries P, Buffalo EA. Oscillatory activity in the monkey hippocampus during visual exploration and
memory formation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2013;
110(32):13144–13149. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1302351110.

Kipping D, Nogueira W. A Computational Model of a Single Auditory Nerve Fiber for Electric-Acoustic Stim-
JARO. 2022 Dec; 23(6):835–858. doi:

Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology:

ulation.
10.1007/s10162-022-00870-2.

Kitchigina VF. Alterations of Coherent Theta and Gamma Network Oscillations as an Early Biomarker of
Temporal Lobe Epilepsy and Alzheimer’s Disease. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience. 2018; 12. https:
//www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnint.2018.00036.

Kocsis B, Bragin A, Buzsáki G. Interdependence of Multiple Theta Generators in the Hippocampus: a Partial
Coherence Analysis. Journal of Neuroscience. 1999 Jul; 19(14):6200–6212. https://www.jneurosci.org/content/
19/14/6200, doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-14-06200.1999, publisher: Society for Neuroscience Section: ARTI-
CLE.

Kosenko A, Kang S, Smith IM, Greene DL, Langeberg LK, Scott JD, Hoshi N. Coordinated signal integration at the
M-type potassium channel upon muscarinic stimulation. The EMBO journal. 2012 May; 31(14):3147–3156.
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.156.

Kota S, Rugg MD, Lega BC. Hippocampal Theta Oscillations Support Successful Associative Memory Formation.
The Journal of Neuroscience. 2020 Dec; 40(49):9507–9518. http://www.jneurosci.org/lookup/doi/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0767-20.2020, doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0767-20.2020.

24 of 52

986

987

988

989

990

991

992

993

994

995

996

997

998

999

1000

1001

1002

1003

1004

1005

1006

1007

1008

1009

1010

1011

1012

1013

1014

1015

1016

1017

1018

1019

1020

1021

1022

1023

1024

1025

1026

1027

1028

1029

1030

1031

1032

1033

Kuramoto Y.

Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and Turbulence, vol. 19 of Springer Series in Synergetics.
Haken H, editor, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 1984. http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-3-642-69689-3, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-69689-3.

Kwag J, Jang HJ, Kim M, Lee S. M-type potassium conductance controls the emergence of neural phase codes:
Journal of the Royal Society, Interface. 2014 Oct;

a combined experimental and neuron modelling study.
11(99):20140604. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0604.

Kwag J, Paulsen O. The timing of external input controls the sign of plasticity at local synapses. Nature Neuro-

science. 2009 Oct; 12(10):1219–1221. http://www.nature.com/articles/nn.2388, doi: 10.1038/nn.2388.

Lacruz ME, Valentín A, Seoane JJG, Morris RG, Selway RP, Alarcón G. Single pulse electrical stimulation of the
hippocampus is suﬃcient to impair human episodic memory. Neuroscience. 2010 Oct; 170(2):623–632. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.06.042.

Larson J, Munkácsy E.

Theta-burst LTP.

Brain Research. 2015 Sep;

1621:38–50.

doi:

10.1016/j.brainres.2014.10.034.

Lega B, Burke J, Jacobs J, Kahana MJ. Slow-Theta-to-Gamma Phase-Amplitude Coupling in Human Hippocam-
pus Supports the Formation of New Episodic Memories. Cerebral Cortex (New York, NY: 1991). 2016 Jan;
26(1):268–278. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu232.

Lega BC, Jacobs J, Kahana M. Human hippocampal theta oscillations and the formation of episodic memo-
ries. Hippocampus. 2012 Apr; 22(4):748–761. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/hipo.20937, doi:
10.1002/hipo.20937.

Lengyel M, Kwag J, Paulsen O, Dayan P. Matching storage and recall: hippocampal spike timing–dependent
plasticity and phase response curves. Nature Neuroscience. 2005 Dec; 8(12):1677–1683. http://www.nature.
com/articles/nn1561, doi: 10.1038/nn1561.

Levnajić Z, Pikovsky A. Phase resetting of collective rhythm in ensembles of oscillators. Physical Review E.
2010 Nov; 82(5):056202. http://arxiv.org/abs/1007.4097, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.82.056202, arXiv:1007.4097
[cond-mat, physics:nlin].

Lin JJ, Rugg M, Das S, Stein J, Rizzuto D, Kahana M, Lega B. Theta band power increases in the posterior hip-
pocampus predict successful episodic memory encoding in humans. Hippocampus. 2017 Oct; 27(10):1040–
1053. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6517838/, doi: 10.1002/hipo.22751.

Lisman JE, Jensen O. The Theta-Gamma Neural Code. Neuron. 2013 Mar; 77(6):1002–1016. https://linkinghub.

elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0896627313002316, doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.03.007.

Lisman JE, Talamini LM, Raffone A. Recall of memory sequences by interaction of the dentate and CA3: A
revised model of the phase precession. Neural Networks. 2005 Nov; 18(9):1191–1201. https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0893608005002017, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2005.08.008.

Lozano AM, Fosdick L, Chakravarty MM, Leoutsakos JM, Munro C, Oh E, Drake KE, Lyman CH, Rosenberg PB,
Anderson WS, Tang-Wai DF, Pendergrass JC, Salloway S, Asaad WF, Ponce FA, Burke A, Sabbagh M, Wolk
DA, Baltuch G, Okun MS, et al. A Phase II Study of Fornix Deep Brain Stimulation in Mild Alzheimer’s
Disease.
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease. 2016 Jan; 54(2):777–787. https://content.iospress.com/articles/
journal-of-alzheimers-disease/jad160017, doi: 10.3233/JAD-160017, publisher: IOS Press.

Lu Y, Truccolo W, Wagner FB, Vargas-Irwin CE, Ozden I, Zimmermann JB, May T, Agha NS, Wang J, Nurmikko AV.
Optogenetically induced spatiotemporal gamma oscillations and neuronal spiking activity in primate motor
cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology. 2015 Jun; 113(10):3574–3587. https://www.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/
jn.00792.2014, doi: 10.1152/jn.00792.2014.

Lundqvist M, Rehn M, Djurfeldt M, Lansner A. Attractor dynamics in a modular network model of neocortex.
Network: Computation in Neural Systems. 2006 Jan; 17(3):253–276. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.
1080/09548980600774619, doi: 10.1080/09548980600774619.

Lurie SM, Kragel JE, Schuele SU, Voss JL. Human hippocampal responses to network intracranial stimu-
lation vary with theta phase. eLife. 2022 Dec; 11:e78395. https://elifesciences.org/articles/78395, doi:
10.7554/eLife.78395.

25 of 52

1034

1035

1036

1037

1038

1039

1040

1041

1042

1043

1044

1045

1046

1047

1048

1049

1050

1051

1052

1053

1054

1055

1056

1057

1058

1059

1060

1061

1062

1063

1064

1065

1066

1067

1068

1069

1070

1071

1072

1073

1074

1075

1076

1077

1078

1079

1080

1081

1082

1083

Malkov A, Shevkova L, Latyshkova A, Kitchigina V.

tions during the episodic-like memory test:
ogy. 2022 Aug; 354:114110.
10.1016/j.expneurol.2022.114110.

Theta and gamma hippocampal–neocortical oscilla-
Experimental Neurol-
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0014488622001352, doi:

Impairment in epileptogenic rats.

Manseau F, Goutagny R, Danik M, Williams S. The Hippocamposeptal Pathway Generates Rhythmic Firing of
GABAergic Neurons in the Medial Septum and Diagonal Bands: An Investigation Using a Complete Septohip-
pocampal Preparation In Vitro. Journal of Neuroscience. 2008 Apr; 28(15):4096–4107. https://www.jneurosci.
org/content/28/15/4096, doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0247-08.2008, publisher: Society for Neuroscience Section:
Articles.

McCartney H, Johnson AD, Weil ZM, Givens B. Theta reset produces optimal conditions for long-term poten-
tiation. Hippocampus. 2004; 14(6):684–687. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/hipo.20019, doi:
10.1002/hipo.20019, \_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/hipo.20019.

McIntyre CC, Grill WM, Sherman DL, Thakor NV. Cellular effects of deep brain stimulation: model-based
doi:

Journal of Neurophysiology. 2004 Apr; 91(4):1457–1469.

analysis of activation and inhibition.
10.1152/jn.00989.2003.

Mina F, Benquet P, Pasnicu A, Biraben A, Wendling F. Modulation of epileptic activity by deep brain stimula-
tion: a model-based study of frequency-dependent effects. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience. 2013;
7. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.2013.00094/full, doi: 10.3389/fncom.2013.00094, pub-
lisher: Frontiers.

Mizuseki K, Sirota A, Pastalkova E, Buzsáki G. Theta Oscillations Provide Temporal Windows for Local Cir-
cuit Computation in the Entorhinal-Hippocampal Loop. Neuron. 2009 Oct; 64(2):267–280. https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0896627309006734, doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.08.037.

Mormann F, Fell J, Axmacher N, Weber B, Lehnertz K, Elger CE, Fernández G. Phase/amplitude reset and
theta-gamma interaction in the human medial temporal lobe during a continuous word recognition mem-
ory task. Hippocampus. 2005; 15(7):890–900. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/hipo.20117, doi:
10.1002/hipo.20117.

Müller C, Remy S. Septo–hippocampal interaction. Cell and Tissue Research. 2018 Sep; 373(3):565–575. https:

//doi.org/10.1007/s00441-017-2745-2, doi: 10.1007/s00441-017-2745-2.

Mysin IE, Kitchigina VF, Kazanovich YB. Phase relations of theta oscillations in a computer model of the
hippocampal CA1 ﬁeld: Key role of Schaffer collaterals. Neural Networks. 2019 Aug; 116:119–138. https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0893608019301029, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2019.04.004.

Nelson AR, Kolasa K, McMahon LL. Noradrenergic Sympathetic Sprouting and Cholinergic Reinnervation
Maintains Non-Amyloidogenic Processing of A𝛽PP. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease. 2014 Jan; 38(4):867–879.
https://content.iospress.com/articles/journal-of-alzheimers-disease/jad130608, doi: 10.3233/JAD-130608, pub-
lisher: IOS Press.

Neymotin SA, Lazarewicz MT, Sherif M, Contreras D, Finkel LH, Lytton WW. Ketamine Disrupts Theta Modula-
tion of Gamma in a Computer Model of Hippocampus. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2011 Aug; 31(32):11733–
11743. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3177405/, doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0501-11.2011.

Nuñez A, Buño W. The Theta Rhythm of the Hippocampus: From Neuronal and Circuit Mechanisms to Behavior.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience. 2021; 15. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncel.2021.649262/
full, doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.649262, publisher: Frontiers.

Onslow ACE, Jones MW, Bogacz R. A Canonical Circuit for Generating Phase-Amplitude Coupling. PLoS
https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0102591, doi: 10.1371/jour-

ONE. 2014 Aug; 9(8):e102591.
nal.pone.0102591.

Pirini M, Rocchi L, Sensi M, Chiari L. A computational modelling approach to investigate different targets in deep
brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Computational Neuroscience. 2009 Feb; 26(1):91–107.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10827-008-0100-z, doi: 10.1007/s10827-008-0100-z.

Ponzi A, Dura-Bernal S, Migliore M. Theta-gamma phase amplitude coupling in a hippocampal CA1 microcircuit.
PLOS Computational Biology. 2023 Mar; 19(3):e1010942. https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.
1371/journal.pcbi.1010942, doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010942, publisher: Public Library of Science.

26 of 52

1084

1085

1086

1087

1088

1089

1090

1091

1092

1093

1094

1095

1096

1097

1098

1099

1100

1101

1102

1103

1104

1105

1106

1107

1108

1109

1110

1111

1112

1113

1114

1115

1116

1117

1118

1119

1120

1121

1122

1123

1124

1125

1126

1127

1128

1129

1130

1131

1132

1133

Rattay F, Minassian K, Dimitrijevic MR. Epidural electrical stimulation of posterior structures of the human
lumbosacral cord: 2. quantitative analysis by computer modeling. Spinal Cord. 2000 Aug; 38(8):473–489. doi:
10.1038/sj.sc.3101039.

Rattay F, Resatz S, Lutter P, Minassian K, Jilge B, Dimitrijevic MR. Mechanisms of Electrical Stimulation with
Neural Prostheses: Mechanisms in Electrical Stimulation. Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural In-
terface. 2003 Jan; 6(1):42–56. http://doi.wiley.com/10.1046/j.1525-1403.2003.03006.x, doi: 10.1046/j.1525-
1403.2003.03006.x.

Rattay F.

Analysis of Models for External Stimulation of Axons.

IEEE Transactions on Biomed-
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4122186/, doi:

ical Engineering. 1986 Oct; BME-33(10):974–977.
10.1109/TBME.1986.325670.

Rattay F, Bassereh H, Stiennon I. Compartment models for the electrical stimulation of retinal bipolar cells.
PLOS ONE. 2018 Dec; 13(12):e0209123. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.
0209123, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209123, publisher: Public Library of Science.

Rizzuto DS, Madsen JR, Bromﬁeld EB, Schulze-Bonhage A, Seelig D, Aschenbrenner-Scheibe R, Kahana MJ.
Reset of human neocortical oscillations during a working memory task. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2003 Jun; 100(13):7931–7936. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0732061100,
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0732061100.

Rougier NP. A Density-Driven Method for the Placement of Biological Cells Over Two-Dimensional Manifolds.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics. 2018 Mar; 12:12. http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fninf.2018.00012/
full, doi: 10.3389/fninf.2018.00012.

Rubin JE, Terman D. High frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus eliminates pathological thalamic
rhythmicity in a computational model. Journal of Computational Neuroscience. 2004 Jun; 16(3):211–235. doi:
10.1023/B:JCNS.0000025686.47117.67.

Segneri M, Bi H, Olmi S, Torcini A. Theta-Nested Gamma Oscillations in Next Generation Neural Mass Models.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience. 2020; 14. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.2020.
00047/full, doi: 10.3389/fncom.2020.00047, publisher: Frontiers.

Solomon EA, Sperling MR, Sharan AD, Wanda PA, Levy DF, Lyalenko A, Pedisich I, Rizzuto DS, Kahana MJ. Theta-
burst stimulation entrains frequency-speciﬁc oscillatory responses. Brain Stimulation. 2021 Sep; 14(5):1271–
1284. https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1935861X21002163, doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2021.08.014.

Stimberg M, Brette R, Goodman DF. Brian 2, an intuitive and eﬃcient neural simulator. eLife. 2019 Aug;
8:e47314. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.47314, doi: 10.7554/eLife.47314, publisher: eLife Sciences Publica-
tions, Ltd.

Sun J, Kapur J. M-type potassium channels modulate Schaffer collateral-CA1 glutamatergic synaptic transmis-

sion. The Journal of Physiology. 2012 Aug; 590(16):3953–3964. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.235820.

Suthana N, Fried I. Deep brain stimulation for enhancement of learning and memory. NeuroImage. 2014 Jan;

85 Pt 3:996–1002. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.07.066.

Suthana N, Haneef Z, Stern J, Mukamel R, Behnke E, Knowlton B, Fried I. Memory Enhancement and Deep-
Brain Stimulation of the Entorhinal Area. New England Journal of Medicine. 2012 Feb; 366(6):502–510. https:
//doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1107212, doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1107212, publisher: Massachusetts Medical Society
\_eprint: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1107212.

Takeuchi Y, Nagy AJ, Barcsai L, Li Q, Ohsawa M, Mizuseki K, Berényi A. The Medial Septum as a Potential
Target for Treating Brain Disorders Associated With Oscillopathies. Frontiers in Neural Circuits. 2021; 15:66.
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fncir.2021.701080, doi: 10.3389/fncir.2021.701080.

Tass PA. A model of desynchronizing deep brain stimulation with a demand-controlled coordinated reset
of neural subpopulations. Biological Cybernetics. 2003 Aug; 89(2):81–88. http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s00422-003-0425-7, doi: 10.1007/s00422-003-0425-7.

Titiz AS, Hill MRH, Mankin EA, M Aghajan Z, Eliashiv D, Tchemodanov N, Maoz U, Stern J, Tran ME, Schuette
P, Behnke E, Suthana NA, Fried I. Theta-burst microstimulation in the human entorhinal area improves
memory speciﬁcity. eLife. 2017 Oct; 6:e29515. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.29515, doi: 10.7554/eLife.29515,
publisher: eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd.

27 of 52

1134

1135

1136

1137

1138

1139

1140

1141

1142

1143

1144

1145

1146

1147

1148

1149

1150

1151

1152

1153

1154

1155

1156

1157

1158

1159

1160

1161

1162

1163

1164

1165

1166

1167

1168

1169

1170

1171

1172

1173

1174

1175

1176

1177

1178

Torben-Nielsen B, Uusisaari M, Stiefel K. A comparison of methods to determine neuronal phase-response
curves. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics. 2010; 4:6. https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fninf.2010.00006,
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2010.00006.

Tort ABL, Rotstein HG, Dugladze T, Gloveli T, Kopell NJ. On the formation of gamma-coherent cell assemblies
by oriens lacunosum-moleculare interneurons in the hippocampus. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences. 2007 Aug; 104(33):13490–13495. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0705708104, doi:
10.1073/pnas.0705708104.

Tort ABL, Komorowski R, Eichenbaum H, Kopell N. Measuring Phase-Amplitude Coupling Between Neuronal
Oscillations of Different Frequencies. Journal of Neurophysiology. 2010 Aug; 104(2):1195–1210. https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2941206/, doi: 10.1152/jn.00106.2010.

Tort ABL, Komorowski RW, Manns JR, Kopell NJ, Eichenbaum H. Theta–gamma coupling increases during
the learning of item–context associations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2009 Dec;
106(49):20942–20947. https://www.pnas.org/content/106/49/20942, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0911331106, pub-
lisher: National Academy of Sciences Section: Biological Sciences.

Tort ABL, Kramer MA, Thorn C, Gibson DJ, Kubota Y, Graybiel AM, Kopell NJ. Dynamic cross-frequency couplings
of local ﬁeld potential oscillations in rat striatum and hippocampus during performance of a T-maze task.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2008 Dec; 105(51):20517–20522. https://www.pnas.org/
content/105/51/20517, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0810524105, publisher: National Academy of Sciences Section:
Biological Sciences.

Toth K, Borhegyi Z, Freund T. Postsynaptic targets of GABAergic hippocampal neurons in the medial septum-
diagonal band of broca complex. The Journal of Neuroscience. 1993 Sep; 13(9):3712–3724. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6576440/, doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.13-09-03712.1993.

Traub RD, Bibbig A, LeBeau FEN, Buhl EH, Whittington MA. Cellular mechanisms of neuronal population os-
cillations in the hippocampus in vitro. Annual Review of Neuroscience. 2004; 27:247–278. doi: 10.1146/an-
nurev.neuro.27.070203.144303.

Traub RD, Jefferys JGR, Whittington MA. Simulation of Gamma Rhythms in Networks of Interneurons and

Pyramidal Cells. Journal of Computational Neuroscience. 1997; p. 10.

Tsanov M, Manahan-Vaughan D. Long-Term Plasticity Is Proportional to Theta-Activity. PLoS ONE. 2009 Jun;
4(6):e5850. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2688745/, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005850.

Unal G, Joshi A, Viney TJ, Kis V, Somogyi P. Synaptic Targets of Medial Septal Projections in the Hippocam-
pus and Extrahippocampal Cortices of the Mouse. Journal of Neuroscience. 2015 Dec; 35(48):15812–15826.
https://www.jneurosci.org/content/35/48/15812, doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2639-15.2015, publisher: Society
for Neuroscience Section: Articles.

Varga V, Hangya B, Kránitz K, Ludányi A, Zemankovics R, Katona I, Shigemoto R, Freund TF, Borhegyi Z. The
presence of pacemaker HCN channels identiﬁes theta rhythmic GABAergic neurons in the medial septum.
The Journal of Physiology. 2008 Aug; 586(16):3893–3915. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.155242.

Wang XJ. Pacemaker Neurons for the Theta Rhythm and Their Synchronization in the Septohippocampal Re-
ciprocal Loop. Journal of Neurophysiology. 2002 Feb; 87(2):889–900. https://journals.physiology.org/doi/full/
10.1152/jn.00135.2001, doi: 10.1152/jn.00135.2001, publisher: American Physiological Society.

Weerasinghe G, Duchet B, Cagnan H, Brown P, Bick C, Bogacz R. Predicting the effects of deep brain stimulation
using a reduced coupled oscillator model. PLoS Computational Biology. 2019 Aug; 15(8):e1006575. https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6701819/, doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006575.

Williams JM, Givens B. Stimulation-induced reset of hippocampal theta in the freely performing rat. Hippocam-
pus. 2003 Jan; 13(1):109–116. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/hipo.10082, doi: 10.1002/hipo.10082,
publisher: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

28 of 52

Figures

29 of 52

Figure 1. Dynamical computational model of the hippocampal formation and medial septum oscillatory drive. A. Anatomical
representation of the neuronal types and interconnections within and between the medial septum and the hippocampal formation (EC:
entorhinal cortex, DG: dentate gyrus, CA3 and CA1 ﬁelds of the hippocampus) B. Simpliﬁed anatomy of the hippocampal formation, modeled as
a 15-mm thick cylindrical slice, with spatially segregated excitatory and inhibitory neurons (blue: excitatory neurons, consisting of granule cells
in DG and pyramidal cells in other areas; red: inhibitory basket cells). C. Model architecture and connectivity. Each area is comprised of one
excitatory and one inhibitory neuronal population. Theta drive is provided through input from the medial septum, which is modeled as a set of
250 Kuramoto oscillators and receives feedback connections from CA1. Electrical stimulation Is modeled as an intracellular current affecting
both excitatory and inhibitory populations in the targeted area (shown here for CA1). D. Illustration of Kuramoto oscillators with two different
levels of synchronization. Each dot represents one oscillator, its position on the circle indicates its phase and its color its angular velocity. Higher
synchronization corresponds to a clustering of the dots around a similar phase. “𝑟” indicates the order parameter, which is a measure of
synchronization.

30 of 52

EIEIEIEIDGECHippocampusMedial SeptumKuramoto Oscillators(N=250)n:nCA3CA11:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:n1:nn:nStimulation(targets both E & I)Medial SeptumHippocampal FormationFimbria / FornixCA1ECDGCA3GABAergic neuronGlutamatergic neuronCholinergic neuronCA3CA1EC1 mmStimulation15 mmDGA.C.B.D.Kuramoto Oscillatorsr = 0.20ωLow synchronizationr = 0.85ωHigh synchronization minmaxAngularVelocitiesFigure 2. Emergence of gamma oscillations in coupled excitatory-inhibitory populations under ramping input to both populations. A.
Two coupled populations of excitatory pyramidal neurons (𝑁𝐸
= 100) are driven by a ramping current
input (0 nA to 1 nA) for 5 s. As the input becomes stronger, oscillations start to emerge (shaded green area), driven by the interactions between
excitatory and inhibitory populations. The green inset shows the raster plot (neuronal spikes across time) of the two populations during the
green shaded period (red for inhibitory; blue for excitatory). When the input becomes suﬃciently strong (shaded magenta area), the
populations become highly synchronized and produce oscillations in the gamma range (at approximately 50 Hz). The spectrogram (bottom
panel) shows the power of the instantaneous ﬁring rate of the pyramidal population as a function of time and frequency. It reveals the presence
of gamma oscillations that emerge around 2s and increase in frequency until 4 s, when they settle at approximately 60 Hz. B. Similar depiction
as in panel A. with the pyramidal-interneuronal populations decoupled. The absence of coupling leads to the abolition of gamma oscillations,
each cell spiking activity being driven by its own inputs and intrinsic properties.

= 1000) and inhibitory interneurons (𝑁𝐼

31 of 52

Excitatory-Inhibitory CoupledExcitatory-Inhibitory Decoupled500 msEmergence of oscillations20 ms20 msSettling of gamma oscillations500 ms20 ms123401Ramp Input (nA)123401Ramp Input (nA)1234Time [s]4060100Spectrogram of excitatory firing rate1234Time [s]4060100Spectrogram of excitatory firing rate0505A.B.EIWEEWEIWIIWIEinputinputEIinputinput32 of 52

μI: 50.0 HzμE: 12.4 HzCA1 Spiking ActivityInhibitoryExcitatory100 HzCA1 Firing Rates1060120InhibitorySpectrograms7.07.58.08.59.0Time [s]1060120Excitatory02ππ/2Phasefθ=4.5 Hz01A.Theta Rhythm010255075100Frequency [Hz]0PSDCA1 Spectral Analysis406080InhibitoryExcitatoryB.θpeakθtrough40 Hz60 Hz80 Hz MI: 0.2304Phase-Amplitude CouplingminmaxC.-π-π/20π/2πStim. Phase [rad]0-π/4-π/8π/8π/4Δφ [rad]Phase Response Curve (PRC)0.00.51.025102040 Stim. Amp. [nA]D.: mean oscillation frequency), instantaneous phase of
: mean ﬁring rates

Figure 3. Theta-nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset in response to a single stimulation pulse. A. Representative example of
the network behavior, spontaneously producing theta-nested gamma oscillations and characterized by a reset of the theta phase following a
single stimulation pulse (vertical grey line, applied here in CA1 at a theta phase of 𝜋∕2, i.e., in the middle of the descending slope). Top to bottom:
theta rhythm originating from the medial septum and provided as an input to the EC (𝑓𝜃
the theta rhythm, raster plots indicating the spiking activity of CA1 excitatory (blue) and inhibitory (red) neurons (𝜇𝐸
within the shaded area), average population ﬁring rates in CA1 (computed as a windowed moving average with a sliding window of 100 ms with
99% overlap), spectrograms for each CA1 population (windowed short-time fast Fourier transform using a Hann sliding window: 100 ms with
99% overlap). Spectrograms show gamma oscillations (around 60 Hz) modulated by the underlying theta rhythm (∼ 4 Hz|), indicating
theta-gamma PAC. Theta phase reset after stimulation is associated with a rebound of spiking activity and theta-nested gamma oscillations. B.
Power spectral densities of the CA1 ﬁring rates. Theta peaks are found at 4 Hz for excitatory and inhibitory cells. Gamma activity is located
between 40 and 80 Hz. C. PAC as a function of theta phase and gamma frequency. The polar plot represents the amplitude of gamma
oscillations (averaged across all theta cycles, see methods) at each phase of theta (theta range: 3-9 Hz, phase indicated as angular coordinate)
and for different gamma frequencies (radial coordinate, binned in 10-Hz ranges), indicating that gamma oscillations between 40 and 80 Hz occur
preferentially around the peak of theta. The MI gives an overall quantiﬁcation of how the phase of low-frequency oscillations (3-9 Hz) modulates
the amplitude of higher-frequency oscillations (40-80 Hz) (see Methods and Figure supplement 2). D. PRC in response to a single stimulation pulse
applied in CA1 at various phases of the ongoing theta rhythm and for various stimulation amplitudes (color-coded). The phase difference (left
y-axis) shows the theta phase induced by the stimulation pulse (computed 2.5 ms after the pulse), compared to the phase computed at the
same time in a scenario without stimulation. Positive and negative phase differences respectively indicate phase advances and delays. The grey
trace shows the normalized amplitude of theta (right 𝑦 axis) for different phases, used to indicate the peak and trough of the rhythm.
Stimulation applied in the ascending slope of theta ([−𝜋, 0]) produced a phase advance and accelerated the rhythm towards its peak (0 radians).
Conversely, stimulation during the descending slope ([0, 𝜋]) produced a phase delay that slowed down the rhythm. Higher stimulation
amplitudes yielded a stronger effect.

and 𝜇𝐼

33 of 52

Figure 4. CAN and adaptation (M) currents modulate neuronal responses to single-pulse stimulation in the absence of theta input. A.
Network response to single-pulse stimulation in the absence of medial septum input. Stimulation (grey vertical line, 10 nA, applied in CA1)
induced an instantaneous burst of activity lasting about 20 ms in both excitatory and inhibitory CA1 neurons, followed by a secondary burst
approximately 200 ms later (raster plot and ﬁring rate traces), associated with speciﬁc CAN- and M- currents dynamics (bottom traces, illustrated
) currents indicate respectively a hyperpolarizing and depolarizing
for a representative CA1 excitatory neuron). Positive (𝐼𝑀
effect on the cell membrane potential. B. Similar representation as in A., but in the absence of CAN channel. Stimulation induced only a single
burst of activity, indicating that CAN channels are necessary to observe a rebound of activity. C. Number of bursts in CA1 spiking activity
following a single stimulation pulse at various amplitudes (x-axis), shown both in the presence and absence of CAN channels in excitatory
neurons. The absence of the CAN current leads to the abolition of the second burst, irrespective of stimulation amplitude.

) and negative (𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑁

34 of 52

Spiking Activity Activity w/ ICANFiring Rates [Hz]-500250500Time [ms]0.00.5ICAN,M [nA]IMICAN Activity w/o ICANInhibitoryExcitatory100 ms100 Hz0510Stimulation amplitude [nA]012# of Burstsw/ ICANw/o ICANA.B.C.Figure 5. Medial septum oscillatory drive and stimulation amplitude govern the steady-state response to single-pulse stimulation. A-C.
Network responses to single-pulse stimulation (vertical line) under medial septum input (with phase reset), shown for different amplitudes of
the medial septum oscillatory drive (A-C: increasing oscillator amplitudes). A. Low oscillatory input: stimulation induces only two bursts of
spiking activity as in Figure 4. B. Medium oscillatory input: a single stimulation pulse switches network behavior from no activity to sustained
oscillations driven by the medial septum. C. Higher oscillatory input: theta drive is capable of inducing self-sustained theta-nested gamma
oscillations. In this case, stimulation is delivered at the peak of theta oscillations and does not show a pronounced effect on theta-gamma
oscillations. D. Steady-state response to single-pulse stimulation as a function of medial septum oscillatory input (x-axis) and stimulation
amplitude (y-axis), characterized by three metrics: theta power (3-9 Hz), gamma power (40-80 Hz), and PAC (quantiﬁed using the MI). White dots:
parameter combinations corresponding to panels A-C.

35 of 52

246810Stim. amp. [nA]Theta band powerD.246810Stim. amp. [nA]Gamma band power0.010.050.100.150.20Osc. amp. [nA]246810Stim. amp. [nA]Phase-Amplitude CouplingCA1 NeuronsA.CA1 Firing RatesCA1 NeuronsB.CA1 Firing RatesCA1 NeuronsC.CA1 Firing Rates250 ms100 Hz050100150200250300a.u.050100150200250300350400a.u.0.050.100.150.200.25a.u.Figure 6. Single-pulse stimulation phase differentially affects network responses depending on the presence of theta phase reset. All
results shown here were obtained for parameters from Figure 5B (theta oscillation amplitude: 0.13 nA, stimulation amplitude: 7.0 nA). A single
stimulation pulse was delivered at the peak (A, B) or trough (C, D) of the underlying theta rhythm, either in the presence (A, C) or absence (B, D)
of theta phase reset. With phase reset, both peak and trough stimulation switch network behavior from no activity to sustained oscillations.
Without phase reset, only peak stimulation can induce sustained oscillations. E. Quantiﬁcation of theta power, gamma power, and PAC
(measured using the MI) in CA1 excitatory (blue) and inhibitory (red) populations in all 4 cases (metrics are computed in the shaded areas of
panels A-D).

36 of 52

fθ=4.0 HzA.Theta RhythmPhaseECDGCA3CA1fθ=6.0 Hz01B.Theta Rhythm02πPhasefθ=4.0 HzC.Theta RhythmPhaseECDGCA3CA1fθ=6.0 Hz01D.Theta Rhythm02πPhase250 msA. Peak Stim.Phase ResetB. Peak Stim.No Phase ResetC. Trough Stim.Phase ResetD. Trough Stim.No Phase Reset0100020003000(a.u.)E.CA1 Theta Band PowerA. Peak Stim.Phase ResetB. Peak Stim.No Phase ResetC. Trough Stim.Phase ResetD. Trough Stim.No Phase Reset050100150(a.u.)CA1 Gamma Band PowerA. Peak Stim.Phase ResetB. Peak Stim.No Phase ResetC. Trough Stim.Phase ResetD. Trough Stim.No Phase Reset0.000.050.100.15(a.u.)CA1 Phase-Amplitude CouplingPhase Reset EnabledPhase Reset DisabledPeak StimulationTrough StimulationFigure 7. Pulse train stimulation restores theta-nested gamma oscillations depending on stimulation timing and theta phase reset. All
results shown here were obtained for parameters from Figure 5A (theta oscillation amplitude: 0.05 nA; stimulation amplitude: 7.0 nA).
Representations are similar to Figure 6, with the difference that stimulation consisted of a pulse train delivered at 6 Hz for a duration of 2 s
(individual pulses indicated by grey dots, ﬁrst pulse by a triangle). The pulse train was delivered at the peak (A, B) or trough (C, D) of the
underlying theta rhythm, either in the presence (A, C) or absence (B, D) of theta phase reset. With phase reset, both peak and trough stimulation
switch network behavior from no activity to sustained oscillations. Without phase reset, only peak stimulation can induce sustained oscillations.
E. Quantiﬁcation of theta power, gamma power, and PAC (measured using the MI) in CA1 excitatory (blue) and inhibitory (red) populations in all
4 cases (metrics are computed during the pulse train, within the shaded areas of panels A-D).

37 of 52

fθ=6.0 HzA.Theta RhythmPhaseECDGCA3CA1fθ=6.0 Hz01B.Theta Rhythm02πPhasefθ=6.0 HzC.Theta RhythmPhaseECDGCA3CA1fθ=6.0 Hz01D.Theta Rhythm02πPhase250 msA. Peak Stim.Phase ResetB. Peak Stim.No Phase ResetC. Trough Stim.Phase ResetD. Trough Stim.No Phase Reset010002000(a.u.)E.CA1 Theta Band PowerA. Peak Stim.Phase ResetB. Peak Stim.No Phase ResetC. Trough Stim.Phase ResetD. Trough Stim.No Phase Reset0200400600(a.u.)CA1 Gamma Band PowerA. Peak Stim.Phase ResetB. Peak Stim.No Phase ResetC. Trough Stim.Phase ResetD. Trough Stim.No Phase Reset0.00.10.2(a.u.)CA1 Phase-Amplitude CouplingPhase Reset EnabledPhase Reset DisabledPeak StimulationTrough StimulationAppendix

Supplementary Figures

38 of 52

Figure S1. (Figure 1 – Figure Supplement 1) Inﬂuence of the number of Kuramoto oscillators on their collective dynamics. Left: inﬂuence
of the number of Kuramoto oscillators (𝑁) on the convergence over time of the order parameter (𝑟), which is a measure of synchronization of
the set of oscillators. The above results were obtained using a synchronization ratio 𝑘∕𝑁 of 25. Upon initialization, the oscillators’ natural
frequencies (𝜔𝑖
(𝑈 ∼ [0, 2𝜋]). Right: histograms of the natural frequencies (𝜔𝑖
the number of oscillators increases, the mean frequency appears closer to the desired center frequency of 6 Hz, and the standard error of the
mean is reduced. Overall, increasing the number of oscillators past 250 did not yield any substantial change in the convergence of the order
parameter or the distribution of natural frequencies. This number of oscillators was therefore chosen for all subsequent analyses.

) were normally distributed with a center frequency (𝑓0 = 6 Hz). Initial phases were uniformly distributed around the unit circle

), together with the distribution mean (𝜇) and standard error of the mean (𝜎∕√

𝑁). As

39 of 52

01N = 2rmax = 1.00Oscillators' synchronization(order parameter r)01N = 5rmax = 0.9901N = 10rmax = 0.9901N = 25rmax = 0.9701N = 50rmax = 0.9701N = 100rmax = 0.9601N = 150rmax = 0.9801N = 200rmax = 0.9801N = 250rmax = 0.970.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4Time [s]01N = 500rmax = 0.9745678 μ = 6.61 HzσpN = 0.20 Hz Oscillators' frequencies (ωi2π, Hz) 45678 μ = 6.24 HzσpN = 0.15 Hz45678 μ = 6.30 HzσpN = 0.12 Hz45678 μ = 6.03 HzσpN = 0.10 Hz45678 μ = 6.06 HzσpN = 0.07 Hz45678 μ = 6.06 HzσpN = 0.05 Hz45678 μ = 6.01 HzσpN = 0.04 Hz45678 μ = 6.06 HzσpN = 0.04 Hz45678 μ = 6.03 HzσpN = 0.03 Hz45678 μ = 5.99 HzσpN = 0.02 HzFigure S2. (Figure 2 – Figure Supplement 1) Emergence of gamma oscillations in coupled excitatory-inhibitory populations under
ramping input to the excitatory population. Similar representation as in Figure 2, but with the input provided only to the excitatory
population. All conclusions remain the same. In addition, the inhibitory population does not show any spiking activity in the decoupled case.

40 of 52

Excitatory-Inhibitory CoupledExcitatory-Inhibitory Decoupled500 msEmergence of oscillations20 msSettling of gamma oscillations500 ms20 ms123401Ramp Input (nA)123401Ramp Input (nA)1234Time [s]4060100Spectrogram of excitatory firing rate1234Time [s]4060100Spectrogram of excitatory firing rate5101551015A.B.EIWEEWEIWIIWIEinputEIinputFigure S3. (Figure 2 – Figure Supplement 2) Cell-intrinsic spiking activity in decoupled excitatory and inhibitory populations under
ramping input. A. Input-Frequency (I-F) curves for excitatory cells (left panel; pyramidal neurons with 𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑁
interneurons, fast-spiking) used in the model. Above a certain tonic input (around 0.35 nA for excitatory and 0.1 nA for inhibitory neurons),
neurons can spike in the gamma range. B. Raster plot showing the spiking activity of excitatory (blue, 𝑁𝐸
neurons in decoupled populations under ramping input (top trace) and in the absence of noise in the membrane potential. Despite random
initial conditions across neurons, oscillations emerge in both populations due to the intrinsic properties of the cells, with a frequency that is
predicted by the respective I-F curves (panel A.). C. Similar representation as panel B. but with the addition of stochastic noise in the membrane
potential of each neuron. The presence of noise disrupts the emergence of oscillations in these decoupled populations.

= 1000) and inhibitory (red, 𝑁𝐼

) and inhibitory cells (right panel;

= 100)

41 of 52

0.00.20.40.60.81.0Input [nA]050100Firing rate [Hz]Input-Frequency curve (Excitatory)ExcitatoryInhibitory0.00.20.40.60.81.0Input [nA]0100200300400Input-Frequency curve (Inhibitory)0 nA0.25Ramp InputExcitatory-Inhibitory Decoupled (noiseless)250 msExcitatory-Inhibitory Decoupled (added noise)A.B.C.Figure S4. (Figure 2 – Figure Supplement 3) Neuronal entrainment of fast-spiking interneurons by pulsed optogenetic stimulation in
the high gamma range. All panels show the effects of pulsed optogenetic stimulation of speciﬁc cell types (A. excitatory only, B. inhibitory only,
C. both excitatory and inhibitory cells) at different frequencies, similar to the experiments reported by Cardin and colleagues (Cardin et al.,
2009). Pulsed stimulation was delivered continuously with a frequency ranging from 10 to 200 Hz. The relative power was calculated similarly to
Cardin et al. (2009). Speciﬁcally, for each stimulation frequency, we computed ﬁrst the power spectral density of the population ﬁring rates
using Welch’s method, and then the ratio between the power within a 10-Hz band centered around the stimulation frequency and the total
power across all frequencies. A. Pulsed stimulation of excitatory cells shows a higher relative power in the stimulated neurons at low
frequencies (20 and 40 Hz). B. Pulsed stimulation of inhibitory cells reveals neuronal entrainment, i.e., a peak in their relative power, in the high
gamma range (80-100 Hz). C. Simultaneous pulsed stimulation of both populations reveals a strong entrainment of inhibitory cells in the high
gamma range, and a more modest entrainment of excitatory cells at low frequencies.

42 of 52

0.000.150.30Relative powerStimulation of excitatory cellsA.0.000.150.30Relative powerStimulation of inhibitory cellsB.102030405060708090100110120130140150160170180190200Stim. frequency [Hz]0.000.150.30Relative powerStimulation of excitatory and inhibitory cellsExcitatoryInhibitoryC.Figure S5. (Figure 3 – Figure Supplement 1) Whole-network behavior producing theta-nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset
in response to a single stimulation pulse. This ﬁgure shows the behavior of all areas of the hippocampal formation during the simulation
illustrated in Figure 3A. All areas display bursts of gamma activity that occur almost synchronously at the peak of each theta cycle in both
excitatory and inhibitory neuronal populations (𝜇𝐸
supplied back to the medial septum. A single stimulation pulse (vertical line and grey triangle) delivered to both CA1 populations at a phase of
𝜋∕2 (i.e., halfway through the descending slope) resets the phase of the theta rhythm according to the PRC shown in Figure 3D.

: mean ﬁring rates within the shaded area). The CA1 excitatory population ﬁring rate is

and 𝜇𝐼

43 of 52

00.1 nATheta Rhythm02ππ/2PhaseECμI: 63.3 HzμE: 11.5 HzEC ActivityDGμI: 63.7 HzμE: 14.2 HzDG ActivityCA3μI: 42.0 HzμE: 16.6 HzCA3 ActivityCA1μI: 44.4 HzμE: 11.0 HzCA1 Activity200 ms200 Hz44 of 52

InhibitoryExcitatoryCA1 Firing Rates050100Frequency [Hz]0500010000PSDCA1 Spectral Analysis5075InhibitoryExcitatoryθpeakθtrough40 Hz60 Hz80 HzPhase-Amplitude Coupling2.55.07.510.0Frequency for phase (Hz)405060708090Frequency for amplitude (Hz) MI: 0.27PAC ComodulogramminmaxA.InhibitoryExcitatoryCA1 Firing Rates050100Frequency [Hz]0500010000PSDCA1 Spectral Analysis5075InhibitoryExcitatoryθpeakθtrough40 Hz60 Hz80 HzPhase-Amplitude Coupling2.55.07.510.0Frequency for phase (Hz)405060708090Frequency for amplitude (Hz) MI: 0.20PAC ComodulogramminmaxB.Figure S6. (Figure 3 – Figure Supplement 2) Quantiﬁcation of PAC with and without noise. A. Quantifying PAC in the absence of noise
produced inaccurate identiﬁcation of the coupled frequency bands, due to the complete absence of oscillations at some frequencies. All
analyses are based on the CA1 ﬁring rates (top traces) during a representative simulation. Power spectral densities of these ﬁring rates (left)
indicate that some frequencies have a power of 0. PAC of the excitatory population was assessed using two graphical representations, the polar
plot (middle) and comodulogram (right), and quantiﬁed using the MI. The comodulogram was calculated by computing the MI across 80%
overlapping 1-Hz frequency bands in the theta range and across 90% overlapping 10-Hz frequency bands in the gamma range and subsequently
plotted as a heat map. In the absence of noise, a slow theta frequency centered around 5 Hz is found to modulate a broad range of gamma
frequencies between 40 and 100 Hz. The value indicated on the comodulogram indicates the average MI in the 3-9 Hz theta range and 40-80 Hz
gamma range. As in Figure 3, the polar plot represents the amplitude of gamma oscillations (averaged across all theta cycles) at each phase of
theta (theta range: 3-9 Hz, phase indicated as angular coordinate) and for different gamma frequencies (radial coordinate, binned in 1-Hz
ranges). B. Adding uniform noise to the ﬁring rate (with an amplitude ranging between 15 and 25% of the maximum ﬁring rate) improved the
identiﬁcation of the coupled frequency bands. In this case, the slower theta frequency centered around 5 Hz modulates a gamma band located
between 45 and 75 Hz.

45 of 52

Figure S7. (Figure 3 – Figure Supplement 3) Network behavior generated by Kuramoto oscillators with non-physiological phase
response functions. Each panel is similar to Figure 3A, but with a different offset added to the phase response function of the Kuramoto
oscillators (see methods, Equation 4). The center frequency was set to 6 Hz in all of these simulations. Overall, theta oscillations in these cases
are less sinusoidal and show more abrupt phase changes than in the physiological case. A. A phase offset of −𝜋∕2 leads to an overall theta
oscillation of 4 Hz, with a second peak following the main theta peak. B. A phase offset of +𝜋∕2 reduces the peak of theta, resetting the rhythm
to the middle of the ascending phase. C. A phase offset of 𝜋 or −𝜋 leads to the CA1 output resetting the theta rhythm to the trough of theta.

46 of 52

fθ=4.0 HzZ(θ)=−sin(θ−(θpeak+π/2))00.2 nATheta RhythmA.02πPhaseμI: 35.8 HzμE: 8.3 HzCA1 ActivityInhibitoryExcitatoryfθ=6.0 HzZ(θ)=−sin(θ−(θpeak−π/2))Theta RhythmB.PhaseμI: 44.7 HzμE: 10.0 HzCA1 ActivityInhibitoryExcitatoryfθ=8.0 HzZ(θ)=−sin(θ−(θpeak+π))Theta RhythmC.PhaseμI: 39.2 HzμE: 8.1 HzCA1 ActivityInhibitoryExcitatory250 msFigure S8. (Figure 3 – Figure Supplement 4) A neural mass model of coupled excitatory and inhibitory neurons driven by Kuramoto
oscillators generates theta-nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset. A. Two coupled neural masses (one excitatory and one
inhibitory) driven by Kuramoto oscillators, which represent a dynamical oscillatory drive in the theta range, were used to implement a neural
mass equivalent to our conductance-based model represented in Figure 1. Neural masses were modeled using the Wilson-Cowan formalism,
with parameters adapted from Onslow et al. (2014) (𝑊𝐸𝐸
= 𝑊𝐼𝐸
theta-nested gamma oscillations (middle and bottom panels) in response to the dynamic theta rhythm (top panel). A stimulation pulse delivered
at the descending phase of the rhythm to both populations (marked by the inverted red triangle) produces a robust theta phase reset, similarly
to Figure 3A.

= 0). B. The normalized population ﬁring rates exhibit

= 4.8, 𝑊𝐸𝐼

= 4, 𝑊𝐼𝐼

47 of 52

Neural Mass ModelTheta rhythm (normalized units)Inhibitory Population Firing Rate(normalized units)00.5250msA.B.Excitatory Population Firing Rate(normalized units)EIWEEWEIWIIWIEKuramoto Oscillators(Theta rhythm)Figure S9. (Figure 5 – Figure Supplement 1) Whole-network behavior in response to single-pulse stimulation under low theta oscillatory
drive. This ﬁgure shows the behavior of all areas of the hippocampal formation during the simulation illustrated in Figure 5A. A single
stimulation pulse delivered to both CA1 populations induces two bursts of spiking activity that propagate only from CA1 to EC.

48 of 52

f=6.0 Hz01Theta Rhythm02PhaseI: 6.6 HzE: 0.0 HzEC ActivityI: 0.0 HzE: 0.0 HzDG ActivityI: 0.0 HzE: 0.0 HzCA3 ActivityI: 0.5 HzE: 0.3 HzCA1 ActivityInhibitoryExcitatory100 Hz200 msFigure S10. (Figure 5 – Figure Supplement 2) Whole-network behavior in response to single-pulse stimulation under medium theta
oscillatory drive. This ﬁgure shows the behavior of all areas of the hippocampal formation during the simulation illustrated in Figure 5B. A
single stimulation pulse switches network behavior from no activity to sustained oscillations driven by the medial septum.

49 of 52

f=4.0 Hz01Theta Rhythm02PhaseI: 59.3 HzE: 11.1 HzEC ActivityI: 68.0 HzE: 13.6 HzDG ActivityI: 43.1 HzE: 16.4 HzCA3 ActivityI: 47.0 HzE: 11.1 HzCA1 ActivityInhibitoryExcitatory100 Hz200 msFigure S11. (Figure 5 – Figure Supplement 3) Whole-network behavior in response to single-pulse stimulation under higher theta
oscillatory drive. This ﬁgure shows the behavior of all areas of the hippocampal formation during the simulation illustrated in Figure 5C. Theta
oscillatory drive is enough to induce self-sustained theta-nested gamma oscillations. In this case, stimulation is delivered at the peak of theta
and does not induce a pronounced effect on theta-gamma oscillations.

50 of 52

f=4.5 Hz01Theta Rhythm02PhaseI: 73.0 HzE: 13.7 HzEC ActivityI: 74.5 HzE: 17.2 HzDG ActivityI: 50.1 HzE: 19.6 HzCA3 ActivityI: 51.6 HzE: 12.9 HzCA1 ActivityInhibitoryExcitatory100 Hz200 msFigure S12. (Figure 5 – Figure Supplement 4) CAN currents are necessary for the production of self-sustained theta-gamma oscillations
in response to single-pulse stimulation. A. Same as Figure 5B. B. Similar simulation as panel A., but without the presence of CAN currents in
the EC, CA3 and CA1 ﬁelds of the hippocampus. Removing CAN currents from the model abolishes self-sustained theta-nested gamma
oscillations in response to a single stimulation pulse (for the parameters represented in Figure 5, point B).

51 of 52

A.μI: 44.3 HzμE: 10.4 HzWith ICAN250 msB.μI: 0.2 HzμE: 0.1 HzWithout ICANInhibitoryExcitatoryFigure S13. (Figure 5 – Figure Supplement 5) Synchronization level of the oscillators minimally affects the production of theta-nested
gamma oscillations. A., B. Network responses to single-pulse stimulation (vertical line) under medial septum input (with phase reset), shown
for different synchronization parameter ratios of the Kuramoto oscillators (A,B: 𝑘
𝑁
B. indicates that the model can produce oscillations without external stimulation when the synchronization level is higher. C. Steady-state
response to single-pulse stimulation as a function of medial septum oscillatory input (x-axis) and synchronization parameter ratio ( 𝑘
𝑁
characterized by three metrics: theta power (3-9 Hz), gamma power (40-80 Hz), and PAC (quantiﬁed using the MI). White dots: parameter
combinations corresponding to panels A and B.

of 5 and 35 respectively; stimulation amplitude: 7.0 nA). Panel

, y-axis),

52 of 52

515253545Synchronization (k/N)Theta band powerC.515253545Synchronization (k/N)Gamma band power0.010.050.090.130.170.21Osc. amp. [nA]515253545Synchronization (k/N)Phase-Amplitude CouplingCA1 NeuronsB.CA1 Firing Rates250 ms100 HzCA1 NeuronsA.CA1 Firing Rates050100150200250300a.u.50100150200250300350400a.u.0.050.100.150.200.25a.u.