A behavioral framework for information representation
in the brain
Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre. A behavioral framework for information representation in the brain. Ahmed A.
Moustafa. Computational Models of Brain and Behavior, Wiley, pp.403-412, 2017, 978-1-119-15906-3.
￿hal-01651751￿

HAL Id: hal-01651751

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01651751

Submitted on 29 Nov 2017

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

A behavioral framework for information representation in the brain

Frédéric Alexandre1,2,3

1Inria, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research Centre, France
2Labri, UMR 5800, CNRS, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP
3IMN, UMR 5293, CNRS, Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases

Abstract :
Along evolution,

increasingly complex cognitive
functions have been attributed to an increasingly com-
plex brain architecture. Nevertheless, the brain remains
anchored on an organization dedicated to survival. We
believe that keeping this principle in mind is an ex-
cellent way to better decipher cerebral mechanisms and
corresponding cognitive functions. Accordingly, we des-
cribe here the main characteristics and constraints of
an intelligent agent learning to survive in an intelli-
gent environment, in terms of information ﬂows and
learning principles. On this basis, we propose a frame-
work of description for the architecture of the brain
of mammals, organized around four fundamental ques-
tions to be answered. These questions deﬁne the iden-
tity of the goal (what ?) and the motivation to choose
it (why ?), its location (where ?) and the way to get it
(how ?). Then we explain how the main requirements of
respondent and operant conditioning can be addressed
within this architecture and how it is also compatible
with the elaboration of more complex cognitive me-
chanisms. This can be seen as the validation of this
framework to explore how cognitive functions might
emerge from cerebral circuits and how they have been
made more complex along evolution. It also proposes a
systemic view of the brain, useful to develop the cogni-
tive architecture of an intelligent agent exploring auto-
nomously its environment and to propose to machine
learning innovative algorithms.

Keywords : Learning, cerebral systems, cognitive

architecture

Introduction

Most models in computational neuroscience addres-
sing high level cognitive functions like decision making,
perceptual identiﬁcation or selective attention set the
focus on the role of the cortex and minimize the role

of subcortical structures (Parvizi, 2009). In addition,
emotional and motivational dimensions of these func-
tions are generally underrepresented, not to mention
bodily dimensions. Yet, a variety of sources indicate
that these dimensions are linked one to another and
play an important role in high level cognitive functions.

In short, cerebral circuits responsible for emotional
tagging of stimuli associate them to a valence (depen-
ding if they are appetitive or aversive, particularly to
detect and identify mates, preys and predators) and an
value (depending on their intensity), whereas motiva-
tional circuits are concerned with the evaluation of the
needs or the costs associated to a behavior (Cardinal,
Parkinson, Hall, & Everitt, 2002). It has been speciﬁ-
cally shown that bodily data are necessary to estimate
such information (Damasio & Carvalho, 2013), and are
related to pain, pleasure, fatigue and other visceral and
muscular data (Craig, 2009).

At the origin, such pieces of information are neces-
sary for survival to organize the behavior around such
important external stimuli and internal feelings. Less
primitive species have higher level goals and have de-
veloped higher level cognitive functions but we claim
here that these functions are still dependent on this ini-
tial substratum and their description is not complete if
speciﬁed without any reference to these domains. Such
considerations have been partly addressed in several
modeling domains like Embodied Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(Pfeifer, Bongard, & Grand, 2007), Enactivism (Varela,
Thompson, & Rosch, 1991 ; O’Regan & Noë, 2001) and
more generally Cognitive Science (Gros, 2010).

The goal of this paper is to set the basis for this kind
of description in the domain of Computational Neu-
roscience. This domain is frequently used to explore
cognitive functions and it is also prone to focusing on
higher level mechanisms without any reference to the
more primitive bases. To relate both levels, we propose
to draw a systemic model of the cerebral circuitry of

1

an intelligent agent learning to exploit its environment,
in order to satisfy some internal needs. We will specify
more precisely in the forthcoming sections (i) informa-
tion ﬂows and learning principles at work in such tasks
and we will propose (ii) a general framework for in-
formation representation in the brain. On this basis,
we will discuss (iii) the implications for some cognitive
mechanisms. Throughout these descriptions, it will be
particularly considered that more evolved cerebral me-
chanisms can be seen as extensions of more elementary
survival mechanisms, stressing the need to include the
latter ones in the study of advanced cognitive functions.
The main arguments of this picture are inspired from
data in neuroscience related to experimentations with
primates, which are the main goals of this modeling
framework but information from rodents and of course
from non mammals will be also considered.

1

Information processing by the
intelligent agent

The central goal of the nervous system is to help
animals maintaining their organic structure (Laborit,
1976). This is obvious when an animal learns to get
some food or to avoid a predator. In this case, we pro-
pose to deﬁne here the kind of information ﬂows that
have to be associated and some learning principles ge-
nerally observed in such circumstances.

1.1

Information ﬂows

We deﬁne three worlds (cf. ﬁgure 1) that the brain
can perceive and on which it can act. The external en-
vironment includes objects and agents in the surroun-
ding world, that can be perceived by external sensors
(eyes, ears, skin, tongue, nose), deﬁning exteroception.
The external body is carrying external sensors and can
act in the external environment, depending on its po-
sition perceived by proprioception. The internal body
corresponds to the visceral, chemical and hormonal ma-
chinery of the body that can be perceived by interocep-
tion. Homeostasis but also internal and external actions
can modify these internal states.

Then brain can perceive these three worlds and build
from them a neuronal representation. This representa-
tion can be seen as a fourth world that the brain might
perceive (depending on cerebral connectivity) and on
which it can act, modifying neuronal activations. Some
of them will have an impact on the other three worlds
and will be considered as actions at large, modifying

internal states, position of (parts of) the body or the
surrounding world itself.

1.2 Learning principles

All the actors of the picture evoked above are subject
to the laws of physics or to the laws of nature including
intentionality. There are consequently regularities and
invariants that can be extracted, even if the bad quality
of perception and action (and possibly other reasons)
makes often the world appear as partly stochastic and
unknown. Extracting and exploiting these regularities
(and adapting to uncertainty) is the main purpose of
learning.

Evolution is sometimes considered as a kind of lear-
ning with a very slow constant of time, leading to
the selection of some information ﬂows and of some
causal relations between the resulting representations,
which can be called homeostasis or reﬂexes. Neverthe-
less, learning is preferentially described as the activity
dependent plasticity of the neuronal circuitry, yielding
the elaboration of diﬀerent kinds of memory, to re-
present and store regularities extracted under a va-
riety of learning processes. Emotional learning is rela-
ted to respondent (or pavlovian) conditioning (Balleine
& Killcross, 2006) and is organized around the detec-
tion of unconditional stimuli US, some biologically si-
gniﬁcant stimuli (like the perception of food or preda-
tors) triggering automatic and reﬂexe responses (like
salivation or freezing). The goal of pavlovian condi-
tioning is to learn to associate a US to a conditional
stimulus CS that announces it. Depending on the dis-
tance (in space and time) to these stimuli, this can
generate a consummatory phase to get prepared to the
US or a preparatory phase more related to orientation,
corresponding in both cases to a stereotyped behavior.
In summary, pavlovian conditioning performs mainly
an emotional tagging of the environment, in order to
detect noxious or appetitive stimuli. On this basis,
some elementary automatic bodily, hormonal or auto-
nomic responses can be triggered (LeDoux, 2007) to
prepare the body to an inevitable event or, at best, to
improve its orientation. In contrast, operant (or instru-
mental) conditioning is going to consider such stimuli
as potential external goals to avoid or to reach and to
confront them to internal goals corresponding to needs
(levels of thirst or hunger) and integrity of the body
(risk of harm or fatigue). Motivational learning will
correspond to learn in which context to explicitly se-
lect actions (including internal actions and decisions)
to obtain such reinforcement (goals reaching or avoi-
ding) and will be described as a goal-directed behavior.

2

Figure 1 – Systemic view of the brain and its relations to the external environment and the body, including its
internal and external facet. Perception of these worlds corresponds respectively to exteroception, interoception
and proprioception. This results in a neuronal representation which might decide for a modiﬁcation (considered
as an action) in any of these worlds. These information ﬂows are the basis for perceiving needs and goals and
for deﬁning the most appropriate responses for the survival of the agent.

3

After extensive learning, the context will be suﬃcient
to trigger actions with no reference to the targeted rein-
forcement and will be called habitual behavior (Gruber
& McDonald, 2012).

localized ? How it can be reached ? For each of that
questions, we propose an initial level of representation,
as generally described in the sensory cortex and in an-
cient extracortical structures.

In addition to these two learning paradigms, cen-
tral for survival capabilities and present in all ver-
tebrates (Laberge, Muhlenbrock-Lenter, Grunwald, &
Roth, 2006), other kinds of learning have evolved to in-
crease animal skills, complexifying their semantic, epi-
sodic or working memories and accordingly the kind of
information they can manipulate, as described below.

2 A reasoned framework of in-
formation representation in the
brain

We have described some characteristics of an animal
seen as an agent engaged in emotional and motivatio-
nal learning for a survival purpose. We can reasonably
propose that regularities extracted by these and other
kinds of learning will be extracted and represented in
the brain from information exchanged with the three
worlds enumerated above and with other brain regions.
Speciﬁcally, these pieces of knowledge will be used to
act on and modify these worlds and neuronal activity
in the brain. Beyond survival, we will argue below that
some of these behaviors are also classically described
as mobilizing high level cognitive functions, depending
on the mechanisms engaged.

In order to emphasize that this description of the
cognitive architecture is not a loose analogy but re-
mains tightly constrained by the cerebral circuitry, we
propose here a reasoned framework of information re-
presentation in the brain (cf ﬁgure 2) and explain how
it ﬁts with known anatomical and physiological charac-
teristics of the brain and how it is particularly conve-
nient to bear information ﬂows and learning principles
evoked above.

On the one hand, we describe the brain as loops
between ﬁve major kinds of neuronal structures : (i)
Ancient extracortical structures for elementary senso-
rimotor associations ; (ii) The sensory cortex for the
representation of sensory information ; (iii) The hip-
pocampus for the binding of multimodal information ;
(iv) The frontal cortex for action representation ; (v)
The basal ganglia for action selection. On the other
hand, we propose to organize the behavior around four
fundamental questions that the brain has to answer :
What is the goal of the action ? Why is it appropriate
considering the current motivation ? Where is this goal

What - The representation of the goal : The
amygdala is an ancient cerebral structure playing a
central role in pavlovian conditioning (LeDoux, 2007).
It is composed of several nuclei (Swanson & Petro-
vich, 1998), including the basolateral nucleus involved
in learning the CS-US association and the central nu-
cleus for the expression of emotional responses and re-
lated physiological responses, through structures like
the periaqueductal gray (PAG) and the lateral hypo-
thalamus and also through nuclei releasing neuromo-
dulators (LeDoux, 2007). The basolateral region has
been extensively studied (Belova, Paton, Morrison, &
Salzman, 2007 ; Pessoa & Adolphs, 2010) and appears
to encode many characteristics related to the CS and
the US. It can be consequently described as involved in
the representation of goals or elements of goals of the
behavior. This region is also in relation with many ce-
rebral structures informed by emotional learning and
able to provide amygdala with more precise and ela-
borate information than rough sensory information re-
ceived by the amygdala in primitive animals (Laberge
et al., 2006). There are particularly massive relations
with the Medial Temporal Lobe, including the medial
prefrontal cortex, the hippocampus and the temporal
region of the sensory cortex (cf (Carrere & Alexandre,
2015) for details). Speciﬁcally, neurons in the temporal
cortex has been described as selectively responding to
physical characteristics (Rousselet, Thorpe, & Fabre-
Thorpe, 2004), necessary to describe and identify ob-
jects that might correspond to the goal of the behavior
when associated to an attentional process.

Why - Motivation of the goal : The lateral hy-
pothalamus is an ancient sensorimotor structure rela-
ted to the processing of needs, since it is responsive to
appetitive US and triggers actions related to digestive
functions (Craig, 2003). The same can be said about
the PAG, rather concerned with aversive stimuli and
defensive behavior (Bandler & Shipley, 1994). It has
also been reported that more complex motivational be-
havior can be prepared in these structures in collabora-
tion with the posterior insula, a cerebral sensory region
known for example to represent levels of water depriva-
tion or precise characteristics of a pain (Craig, 2009),
which are typical examples of motivations to act.

Where - Position of the goal : The superior col-
liculus is a central structure for eye movements and
gaze orientation (Lee, Rohrer, & Sparks, 1988), in-
cluding sensory layers representing the surrounding

4

Figure 2 – This scheme proposes to highlight some elements of information representation, extracted from
the literature describing the brain of mammals and mostly of primates. Considering the ﬁve main cerebral
regions (the basal ganglia, the sensory and the frontal cortex, the hippocampus and several ancient extracortical
sensorimotor regions taken as a whole), colors in the scheme indicate some important relations between these
structures forming loops, even if the text reports also other important connections between loops. In the picture,
a simple keyword refers roughly, in the cortical regions, to the kind of fonctions this region contributes and the
text explains in some more details that these functions address four fundamental questions (What, Why, Where
and How). In the basal ganglia, the striatum is composed of its dorsolateral part DLS, dorsomedial part DMS
and limbic part, also called Nucleus Accumbens NAcc with a shell and a core part ; with output structures like
the internal Globus Pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata GPI-SNr and the ventral pallidum VP ; with
dopaminergic regions ventral tegmentum area VTA and substantia nigra pars compacta SNc). Several regions of
the sensory cortex (in the parietal, temporal and insular parts) are receiving inputs from the sensory thalamus
and regions of the frontal cortex include the ventromedial prefrontal cortex vmPFC, the dorsomedial prefrontal
cortex dmPFC, the lateral prefrontal cortex with ventral and dorsal parts vlPFC and dlPFC, the frontal eye ﬁeld
FEF and the motor and premotor regions. The hippocampus is represented with its main internal structures
dentate gyrus DG, CA3 and CA1 and its input cortical structures. In the extracortical regions, structures are
the Amygdala, the Hypothalamus, the Superior Colliculus (SC) and the Cerebellum.

5

environment in topographic layers (Taouali, Goﬀart,
Alexandre, & Rougier, 2015) and motor layers orien-
ting the body toward stimuli selected by competition
inside these maps (Dean, Redgrave, & Westby, 1989).
More complex behaviors of spatial orientation can be
obtained by collaboration with the Frontal Eye Field
(FEF) regions of the frontal cortex (Sommer & Wurtz,
2004) and the posterior dorsal cortex. The superior
part of this latter region has been described for a long
time (Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982) as addressing the
Where question in the sensory cortex by representing
spatial information about the environment.

How - Motor control of the goal : In contrast,
the inferior part of the posterior dorsal cortex has been
described as answering the question How (Milner &
Goodale, 1995), particularly because it encodes cha-
racteristics useful for object manipulation. In this do-
main, the cerebellum (Manto et al., 2012) is a key cere-
bral structure for sensorimotor control and participates
with the dorsal cortex to complex voluntary movements
(Middleton & Strick, 2000).

3 Extension to some cognitive

mechanisms

At this stage, each of the elementary sensorimotor
associations evoked above can yield a pertinent beha-
vior and is probably suﬃcient for an animal with li-
mited perception and behavioral repertoire : in an en-
active way (O’Regan & Noë, 2001), each perception
can elicit a response adapted to identify the nature
of a goal, orient toward this goal and manipulate and
consume it to satisfy a need. Nevertheless, in the real
life things are not so simple and these elementary sen-
sorimotor associations might be not complex enough,
incompatible or might require a more elaborated deci-
sion process to go beyond simple survival in a richer en-
vironment including uncertainty and a variety of rules
and laws. With no claim of exhaustivity, we evoke here
how other cerebral circuits might participate to this
higher level cognitive architecture.

For each of these sensorimotor associations, there is
not a unique relation between one stimulus and one
action answering the corresponding question and the
association can sometimes depend on a context, wha-
tever its spatial or temporal form. This is the role of
reinforcement learning, as compared to a simple heb-
bian associative rule : it can learn the best action to
trigger to optimize reinforcement, depending on a state
not only corresponding to a stimulus but to the aggre-
gation of more information and also in the past and the

future (Niv, 2009). The basal ganglia has often been
described as a structure where a certain kind of rein-
forcement learning can take place (Joel, Niv, & Ruppin,
2002), with its unique combination of aﬀerences from
cortical and extracortical structure and dopaminergic
projections often reported to carry reward prediction
errors, central in such algorithms. It is consequently no-
ticeable that these circuits have been broken down in
ﬁve parallel loops (Alexander, DeLong, & Strick, 1986),
with four loops directly addressing the four questions
mentioned above (and receiving projections from the
corresponding regions) and the last one for associative
integration (cf ﬁgure 2 for more details).

More precisely, in the motor loop (how ?), the dorso-
lateral striatum integrates information from the motor
cortex and proprioceptive information from the sensory
cortex. The oculomotor loop (Hikosaka, Nakamura, &
Nakahara, 2006) is related to the frontal eye ﬁeld area
for selection of gaze orientation (where ?). The anterior
cingulate loop includes the ventral striatum (mainly
the core part of the nucleus accumbens) and is reported
to energize the action, depending on the level of moti-
vation and the cost of the action (Niv, 2007) (why ?).
The orbitofrontal loop includes the shell of the nucleus
accumbens and is concerned with the hedonic value of
objects (Kringelbach, 2005) (what ?). For each of these
loops, the role of the basal ganglia is to learn to trigger,
depending on the context, diﬀerent kinds of actions re-
presented in the related region of the frontal cortex, as
it is sketched in ﬁgure 2.

A frequent situation occuring in realistic cases is that
several objects in the environment can elicit several
actions in the same or in diﬀerent loops and that a
global analysis has to be made to select the most ad-
vantageous action. The architecture of the basal gan-
glia has also been described as particularly adapted to
this problem (Redgrave, Prescott, & Gurney, 1999). In
contrast to other structures like the cortex with dis-
tributed and sparse connectivity, the process of action
selection in the basal ganglia is centralized and it can
address conﬂicts between diﬀerent loops. This is due
to its funneling architecture providing a convergence
of information (Parent & Hazrati, 1995) and to other
characteristics like a spiraling eﬀect providing commu-
nications between the loops (Haber, Fudge, & McFar-
land, 2000).

Among the loops, those answering to the questions
What and Why have a speciﬁc role, because they ad-
dress directly the problem of goal selection from in-
ternal needs and external opportunities, whereas ques-
tions how and where are more related to spatial contin-
gencies (cf ﬁgure 3 for a more behavioral interpreta-

6

tion). These limbic loops are particularly the place for
articulation between pavlovian and operant conditio-
ning, giving a special role to the shell and the core
of the nucleus accumbens, the two input regions of the
basal ganglia for these loops (Mannella, Gurney, & Bal-
dassarre, 2013). It is consequently important to notice
that the hippocampus is mainly associated to these two
loops (Voorn, Vanderschuren, Groenewegen, Robbins,
& Pennartz, 2004) (and not the others), providing epi-
sodic memories to the process of action selection of the
basal ganglia. This has been analyzed as a key com-
ponent of goal-directed behavior related to the evoca-
tion of speciﬁc cases, as compared to more habitual
behavior rather observed in the other loops (Packard
& Knowlton, 2002).

The development of the prefrontal cortex has provi-
ded a more complex processing of time, with the deve-
lopment of working memory processes (O’Reilly, 2010),
particularly useful in the limbic loops (what and why)
to estimate histories of past experiences and contribute
to a more accurate evaluation of uncertainty (McClure,
Gilzenrat, & Cohen, 2006). Considering more recent
steps in the evolution process, the development of the
prefrontal cortex is a major event and provides cogni-
tive control to the intellectual abilities (Badre, 2008).
This is another way to associate the diﬀerent loops,
by elaborating more complex rules to trigger actions.
Even if this is described in terms of planning and reaso-
ning, it remains anchored in the same scheme of loops
between the basal ganglia and the prefrontal cortex.

Discussion

In this paper, we have described brain structures
and functions within a global framework of information
representation. Starting from a simple agent learning
to satisfy some needs in an unknown environment, we
have speciﬁed some constraints concerning information
ﬂows and learning principles and have associated these
constraints to a general picture of the brain describing
four main loops answering four questions important for
survival. Then, we have begun to explain that some im-
portant cognitive capabilities extending beyond survi-
val considerations are tightly linked to these principles
because they have been elaborated and developed on
this primitive substratum. The limited size of the paper
prevented from going in more details on these cognitive
functions and neither to extend to other functions re-
lated to the language for example but this should be
done in future works. For the moment, the main beha-
vioral interpretations of the framework elaborated here

are summarized in ﬁgure 3.

Several authors have already described the brain
as answering such important questions,
including
(Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982) for the what/where op-
position, (Milner & Goodale, 1995) for the how and
(Verschure, Pennartz, & Pezzulo, 2014) for adding the
why but these works were less accurate concerning the
reciprocal mapping of brain structures and functions
and the corresponding reﬁnement along evolution. This
idea is reminiscent of the principle of imbricated senso-
rimotor loops proposed in (Guillery, 2005), convenient
both for incremental learning and for responding at
anytime.

This work can be useful in computational neuros-
cience because it proposes a global framework where
to include some speciﬁc model and can prevent from
building models in isolation with no references to other
structures, functions and related information ﬂows and
learning principles. It can also be useful in machine
learning because it can be a source of inspiration for
bio-inspired learning algorithms, particularly conside-
ring the problem of learning in autonomy. It can be
consequently interesting in the domain of autonomous
robotics, also because it emphasizes the important role
of the body and the environment in the development
of cognitive functions in the brain.

Références

Alexander, G., DeLong, M., & Strick, P. (1986). Pa-
rallel organization of functionally segregated cir-
cuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Ann. Rev.
Neurosci., 9 , 357-381.

Badre, D. (2008). Cognitive control, hierarchy, and the
rostro–caudal organization of the frontal lobes.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12 (5), 193–200.

Balleine, B. W., & Killcross, S. (2006). Parallel incen-
tive processing : an integrated view of amygdala
function. Trends Neurosci , 29 (5), 272–279. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2006.03.002

Bandler, R., & Shipley, M. T. (1994). Columnar organi-
zation in the midbrain periaqueductal gray : mo-
dules for emotional expression ? Trends in Neu-
rosciences, 17 (9), 379–389.

Belova, M. A., Paton, J. J., Morrison, S. E., & Salz-
man, C. D. (2007). Expectation modulates neu-
ral responses to pleasant and aversive stimuli in
primate amygdala. Neuron, 55 (6), 970–984.
Cardinal, R. N., Parkinson, J. A., Hall, J., & Eve-
(2002). Emotion and motivation :
ritt, B. J.
the role of the amygdala, ventral striatum, and

7

Figure 3 – This ﬁgure intends to integrate several lines of discussion in this paper, including the brain-body-
environment system and the framework of brain organization related to the four fundamental questions. We
show in this ﬁgure that sensory interoceptive and exteroceptive poles interact with the limbic and motor poles
to decide for the main characteristics of the behavior. Answers to the fundamental questions specify sensory
constraints in the motor pole related to the position in space and to the body, and in the interoceptive pole
related to pain and pleasure and to fundamental needs. Preferences and motivations in the limbic pole generate
a consummatory behavior or organize a preparatory behavior with the motor pole that can trigger movements
and evoke selective attention to obtain desired changes in the internal and external world and, accordingly, in
the sensory perceptions.

8

prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience & Biobehavio-
ral Reviews, 26 (3), 321–352. doi: 10.1016/s0149
-7634(02)00007-6
Carrere, M., & Alexandre, F.

(2015). A pavlovian
model of the amygdala and its inﬂuence within
the medial temporal lobe. Frontiers in Systems
Neuroscience, 9 (41).

Craig, A. (2003). Interoception : the sense of the phy-
siological condition of the body. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology, 13 (4), 500–505.

Craig, A.

(2009). How do you feel – now ? the an-
terior insula and human awareness. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci., 10 , 59–70.

Damasio, A. R., & Carvalho, G. B. (2013). The na-
ture of feelings : Evolutionary and neurobiologi-
cal origins. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14 (2),
143–152.

Dean, P., Redgrave, P., & Westby, G. W.

(1989).
Event or emergency ? Two response systems in
the mammalian superior colliculus. Trends in
neurosciences, 12 (4), 137–147.

Gros, C. (2010). Cognition and Emotion : Perspectives
of a Closing Gap. Cognitive Computation, 2 (2),
78–85.

Gruber, A. J., & McDonald, R. J. (2012). Context,
emotion, and the strategic pursuit of goals : In-
teractions among multiple brain systems control-
ling motivated behaviour. Frontiers in Behavio-
ral Neuroscience, 6 (50).

Guillery, R. W.

(2005). Anatomical pathways that
link perception and action. In Progress in brain
research (Vol. 149, pp. 235–256). Elsevier.
Haber, S., Fudge, J., & McFarland, N. (2000). Stria-
tonigrostriatal pathways in primates form an as-
cending spiral from the shell to the dorsolateral
striatum. The Journal of Neuroscience, 20 (6),
2369-2382.

Hikosaka, O., Nakamura, K., & Nakahara, H. (2006).
Basal Ganglia orient eyes to reward. J. Neuro-
physiol , 95 (2), 567–584.

Joel, D., Niv, Y., & Ruppin, E. (2002). Actor–critic
models of the basal ganglia : new anatomical and
computational perspectives. Neural Networks,
15 (4-6), 535–547.

Laborit, H. (1976). Eloge de la fuite. Folio Essais.
LeDoux, J. (2007). The amygdala. Current Biology,

17 (20), R868–R874.

Lee, C., Rohrer, W. H., & Sparks, D. L. (1988). Popula-
tion coding of saccadic eye movements by neurons
in the superior colliculus. Nature, 332 (6162),
357–360. doi: 10.1038/332357a0

Mannella, F., Gurney, K., & Baldassarre, G. (2013).
The nucleus accumbens as a nexus between va-
lues and goals in goal-directed behavior : a review
and a new hypothesis. Frontiers in behavioral
neuroscience, 7 .

Manto, M., Bower, J. M., Conforto, A. B. B., Delgado-
García, J. M., da Guarda, S. N. F. N., Gerwig,
M., . . . Timmann, D. (2012). Consensus paper :
roles of the cerebellum in motor control–the di-
versity of ideas on cerebellar involvement in mo-
vement. Cerebellum (London, England), 11 (2),
457–487.

McClure, S., Gilzenrat, M., & Cohen, J.

(2006).
An exploration-exploitation model based on
In
norepinepherine and dopamine activity.
Y. Weiss, B. Schölkopf, & J. Platt (Eds.), Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems
18 (pp. 867–874). MIT Press.
Consulté
sur
http://www.csbmb.princeton.edu/
~{}smcclure/pdf/MGC\_NIPS.pdf

Middleton, F. A., & Strick, P. L. (2000). Basal ganglia
and cerebellar loops : motor and cognitive cir-
cuits. Brain Research Reviews, 31 (2), 236–250.
Milner, A., & Goodale, M. (1995). The visual brain in

action. Oxford University Press, USA.

Niv, Y. (2007). Cost, Beneﬁt, Tonic, Phasic : What
Do Response Rates Tell Us about Dopamine and
Motivation. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1104 (1), 357–376.

Niv, Y.

juin).

(2009,

Reinforcement

learning
Journal of Mathematical
in the brain.
Consulté sur
Psychology, 53 (3), 139–154.
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0022249608001181

O’Regan, J. K., & Noë, A.

(2001). A sensorimotor
account of vision and visual consciousness. The
Behavioral and brain sciences, 24 (5).

Kringelbach, M. L. (2005). The human orbitofrontal
cortex : linking reward to hedonic experience. Nat
Rev Neurosci , 6 (9), 691–702.

O’Reilly, R. C. (2010). The What and How of pre-
frontal cortical organization. Trends in Neuros-
ciences, 33 (8), 355–361.

Laberge, F., Muhlenbrock-Lenter, S., Grunwald, W.,
& Roth, G.
(2006). Evolution of the Amyg-
dala : New Insights from Studies in Amphibians.
Brain Behav Evol , 67 (4), 177–187. Consulté sur
http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000091119

Packard, M. G., & Knowlton, B. J. (2002). Learning
and memory functions of the basal ganglia. An-
nual review of neuroscience, 25 (1), 563–593.
Parent, A., & Hazrati, L. N. (1995). Functional ana-
tomy of the basal ganglia. I. The cortico-basal

9

ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop. Brain Res Brain
Res Rev , 20 (1), 91–127.

Parvizi, J.

(2009). Corticocentric myopia : old bias
in new cognitive sciences. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 13 (8), 354–359.

Pessoa, L., & Adolphs, R. (2010). Emotion processing
and the amygdala : from a ’low road’ to ’many
roads’ of evaluating biological signiﬁcance. Na-
ture reviews. Neuroscience, 11 (11), 773–783. doi:
10.1038/nrn2920

Pfeifer, R., Bongard, J., & Grand, S.

(2007). How
the body shapes the way we think : a new view of
intelligence. MIT Press.

Redgrave, P., Prescott, T. J., & Gurney, K. (1999).
The basal ganglia : A vertebrate solution to the
selection problem ? Neuroscience, 89 (4), 1009–
1023.

Rousselet, G., Thorpe, S., & Fabre-Thorpe, M. (2004).
How parallel is visual processing in the ventral
path ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8 (8), 363–
370.

Sommer, M., & Wurtz, R.

(2004). What the brain
stem tells the frontal cortex. I. Oculomotor si-
gnals sent from superior colliculus to frontal eye
ﬁeld via mediodorsal thalamus. Journal of neu-
rophysiology, 91 (3), 1381–1402.

Swanson, L. W., & Petrovich, G. D. (1998). What is
the amygdala ? Trends in Neurosciences, 21 (8),
323–331.

Taouali, W., Goﬀart, L., Alexandre, F., & Rougier,
(2015). A parsimonious computatio-
N. P.
nal model of visual target position encoding in
the superior colliculus. Biological Cybernetics,
109(4)(8), 549–559.
Ungerleider, L., & Mishkin, M.

(1982). Two corti-
cal visual systems. In D. Ingle, M. Goodale, &
R. Mansﬁeld (Eds.), Analysis of visual behavior
(pp. 549–586). MIT Press.

Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The
embodied mind : Cognitive science and human ex-
perience. Cambridge, MA : MIT Press.

Verschure, P. F. M. J., Pennartz, C. M., & Pezzulo, G.
(2014). The why, what, where, when and how of
goal-directed choice : neuronal and computatio-
nal principles. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B : Biological Sciences, 369 (1655),
20130483+.

Voorn, P., Vanderschuren, L. J., Groenewegen, H. J.,
Robbins, T. W., & Pennartz, C. M. (2004). Put-
ting a spin on the dorsal-ventral divide of the
striatum. Trends Neurosci , 27 (8), 468–474.

10

