A computational view of area 3b of primary
somatosensory cortex
Georgios Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Georgios Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier. A computational view of area 3b of primary somatosensory
cortex. Twenty Second Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting : CNS 2013, Jul 2013, Paris,
France. 14 (Suppl 1), pp.P333, 2013. ￿hal-00842311￿

HAL Id: hal-00842311

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00842311

Submitted on 8 Jul 2013

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Detorakis and Rougier BMC Neuroscience 2013, 14(Suppl 1):P333
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/14/S1/P333

P O S T E R P R E S E N T A T I O N

Open Access

A computational view of area 3b of
primary somatosensory cortex
Georgios IS Detorakis1,2\*, Nicolas P Rougier3

From Twenty Second Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting: CNS\*2013
Paris, France. 13-18 July 2013

We investigated the development of topologically orga-
nized representations of a restricted region of skin in the
primary somatosensory cortex (SI), more precisely, area 3b
of SI. We devised a computational model based on the
dynamic neural field theory and on an Oja-like learning
rule at the level of feed-forward thalamocortical connec-
tions [1]. These connections reach area 3b through sub-
thalamic and thalamic relays that convey information
from the Merkel Ending Complexes (MECs), which are
mechanoreceptors of the skin responsible for information
related to touch and pressure. They have been modeled as
a quasi-uniform grid while the rest of the relays have been
neglected. Both the critical and the post-critical periods of
the SI development [2] have been taken into consideration
and the latter has been modeled as a long-term alteration
of lateral connections. During the critical period, SI
remains highly plastic and is able to cope with a vast num-
ber of alterations of the environment or of the body itself.
This condition goes on during the post-critical period but
in a less effective way [3]. In both periods SI is capable of
reorganization in the presence of a cortical lesion [4] (e.g.
stroke) or a sensory deprivation condition [5] (e.g. limb
amputation). In order to examine if the model is capable
of recovery from lesions, both cortical and sensory, we stu-
died three different types of lesions on SI and on skin. As
expected, the model is able to cope with such degenerative
conditions and is able to recover a lot of the lost function-
alities. More precisely, in the case of cortical lesions, neu-
rons that are not affected can recover some of the lost
representations while in the case of sensory deprivation,
neurons that have lost their preferred input, tend to con-
tribute to neighboring representations. Hence, the model
confirms both cases and the mechanism of balance
between excitation and inhibition seems to be the key for

\* Correspondence: georgios.detorakis@inria.fr
1Computer Science, University of Lorraine, Nancy, 54000, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

recovery. Attention is another aspect that has been investi-
gated because of its prominent role in reshaping receptive
fields during execution of demanding touch perception
tasks [6]. In this context we simulated some attentional
mechanisms in order to investigate how attention affects
the receptive fields of the model. In the presence of an
attentional signal, the model is able to gently adapt its
receptive fields according to the position of the stimuli on
the skin. On the one hand attention promotes the migra-
tion of the distant receptive fields towards the attended
area and on the other hand proximal to attended signal
receptive fields undergo shrinkage.

Author details
1Computer Science, University of Lorraine, Nancy, 54000, France. 2INRIA
Nancy - Grand Est, Villers les Nancy, 54603 Cedex, France. 3INRIA Bordeaux -
Sud Ouest, Cours de la Liberation, 33405 Talence Cedex, France.

Published: 8 July 2013

References
1.

2.

Detorakis GI, Rougier NP: Neural Field Model of the Somatosensory
Cortex: Formation, Maintenance and Reorganization of Ordered
Topographic Maps. PloS ONE 2012, 7:e40257.
Gogtay N, Giedd JN, Lusk L, Hayashi KM, Greenstein D, Vaituzis AC, Nugent TF,
Herman DH, Clasen LS, Toga AW, et al: Dynamic mapping of human cortical
development during childhood through early adulthood. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2004, 101:8174-8179.

3. Marik SA, Yamahachi H, McManus JNJ, Szabo G, Gilbert CD: Axonal

4.

dynamics of excitatory and inhibitory neurons in somatosensory cortex.
PLoS Biology 2010, 8:e1000395.
Sober SJ, Stark JM, Yamasaki DS, Lytton WW: Receptive field changes after
strokelike cortical ablation: a role for activation dynamics. Journal of
neurophysiology 1997, 78:3438-3438.

5. Merzenich MM, Kaas JH, Wall J, Nelson RJ, Sur M, Felleman D: Topographic
reorganization of somatosensory cortical areas 3b and 1 in adult
monkeys following restricted deafferentation. Neuroscience 1983, 8:33-55.
Hsiao SS, Vega-Bermudez F: Attention in the somatosensory system. The
Somatosensory System: Deciphering the Brain’s Own Body Image Boca Raton:
CRC Press; 2002, 197-217.

6.

doi:10.1186/1471-2202-14-S1-P333
Cite this article as: Detorakis and Rougier: A computational view of area
3b of primary somatosensory cortex. BMC Neuroscience 2013 14(Suppl 1):P333.

© 2013 Detorakis and Rougier; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

