Numerical simulation scheme of one-and
two-dimensional neural fields involving space-dependent
delays
Axel Hutt, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Axel Hutt, Nicolas P. Rougier. Numerical simulation scheme of one-and two-dimensional neural fields
involving space-dependent delays. P. Beim Graben and S. Coombes and R. Potthast and J.J. Wright.
Neural Field Theory, Springer, 2014. ￿hal-00872132￿

HAL Id: hal-00872132

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00872132

Submitted on 7 Jan 2014

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Numerical simulation scheme of one- and two
dimensional neural ﬁelds involving
space-dependent delays

Axel Hutt
Inria CR Grand Est - Nancy, Villers-les-Nancy, France

Nicolas Rougier
Inria, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, France
LaBRI, UMR 5800 CNRS, Bordeaux University
Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases, UMR 5293

September 5, 2013

1 Introduction

Finite transmission speed in physical systems has attracted research for decades.
Previous work on heat diffusion has shown experimentally that the transmission
speed (also called propagation speed in the literature) is ﬁnite in certain me-
dia [16, 14]. These results do not show accordance to classical diffusion theory
implying inﬁnite transmission speed. To cope with this problem theoretically,
Cattaneo was one of the ﬁrst to insert delay terms into the diffusion equation to
achieve a ﬁnite transmission speed [5].
Recently, an integral model has been proposed which takes into account a ﬁnite
transmission speed as a space-dependent retardation [10]. It was shown that the
Cattaneo-equation can be derived from this model. This model is well-established
in computational neuroscience and known as the neural ﬁeld model. It describes
the activity evolution in a neural population involving ﬁnite transmission speed
along axonal ﬁbres. The neural ﬁeld model has been shown to model success-
fully neural activity known from experiments [9, 3]. In the recent decades, neural

1

ﬁelds have been studied analytically and numerically in one and two spatial di-
mensions [19, 15], while previous studies considered ﬁnite axonal transmission
speeds in one-dimensional models only [6, 11, 1, 2]. To our best knowledge, only
few previous studies considered analytically and numerically ﬁnite transmission
speeds in two-dimensional neural ﬁelds. The current work presents a recently de-
veloped method [13] to reveal ﬁnite transmission speed effects in two-dimensional
systems.
The subsequent paragraphs derive a novel fast numerical scheme to simulate the
corresponding evolution equations in one and then in some detail in two spatial
dimensions. Stimulus-induced activity propagation in two spatial dimensions is
studied numerically to illustrate the delayed activity spread. We ﬁnd numerically
transmission delay-induced breathers.

The underlying model considers a one-dimensional line Ω with length l or
a two-dimensional rectangle spatial domain Ω with side length l, in both cases
assuming periodic boundary conditions. In addition, the center of the coordinate
system is chosen to be the center of the domain in the following. Then the neural
population activity V (x,t), i.e. the mean membrane potential, at spatial location
x

Ω and time t obeys the evolution equation

2

τ

∂
∂t

V (x,t) = I(x,t)

V (x,t) +

−

Ω

Z

dny K(
|

x

y

)S
|

−

y,t

V


✓

−

x
|

−
c

y
|

(1)

◆%

with n = 1 or n = 2, the synaptic time constant τ, the external stimulus I(x,t), the
ﬁnite axonal transmission speed c and the nonlinear transfer function S. Moreover,
the spatial interaction is non-local and is given by the spatial synaptic connectivity
), that depends on the distance between two spatial locations x and
kernel K(
|
|
y only.

−

x

y

2

2 The novel principle

For notational simplicity, let us consider a one-dimensional spatial domain. Then
the integral on the right hand side of Eq. (1) can be re-written as

dz K(

Ω

Z

=

=

=

dz

dz

dz

Ω

Z

Ω

Z

Ω

Z

x
|

−
∞

Z

∞
−
∞

Z

∞
−
τmax

0
Z

x
|

z

|

−
c

)S

z
|

V

dt0 δ

✓
x
|

z,t

−
z
−
|
c −

✓
dt0L(x

z,t

−

t0)S[V (z,t0)]

−

◆%
t0)

◆

K(

x
|

z
|

−

)S[V (z,t0)]

(t

−

dτL(x

−

z, τ)S[V (z,t

τ)],

−

|

x

−

/c

with τmax = l/c. This shows that the introduction of the space-time kernel L(x,t) =
K(x)δ (
t) allows us to write the single space integral as two integrals: one
|
spatial convolution and one integral over delays. To understand the logic of the
xm = m∆x
computation, let us discretize the time and space by t
!
< M/2 and l = M∆x. This implies that the speed c also
with n
2
takes discrete values. We obtain

tn = n∆t, x

N0, m

Z0,

m
|

!

2

|

L(x,t)

!

L(xm,tn)

K(m∆x)δ ((∆x/c)

n∆t)

✓

∆t

⇠
= Kmδ

∆x
c∆t |
✓
= Kmδ (∆t (r
m
|
∆t (r
= Kmδ (
|
Kmδ
,n/r
|
|

m
|
m

| −
−

⇠

m
|

m

| −
n))
n/
|

| −
n
◆◆

))

m
|

with Km = K(m∆x), r = ∆x/(c∆t). The last equation shows that L(xm,tn)
K

= 0 only if r is rational number with r = n/m and thus

n/r 6

±

⇠

c =

∆x
∆t

1
r

=

∆x
∆t

m
n

is discrete.

3

3 The numerical implementation in two spatial di-

mensions

To investigate the activity propagation in detail, we derive a novel iteration scheme
for the numerical integration of (1) for n = 2. Since the integral over space in (1)
is not a convolution in the presence of a ﬁnite transmission speed c, one can not
apply directly fast numerical algorithms such as the Discrete Fast Fourier Trans-
form (DFT) to calculate the integral. Hence the numerical integration of (1) is
very time consuming with standard quadrature techniques. For instance, with a
discretization of the spatial domain by N2 grid intervals and applying the Gaus-
sian quadrature rule for the spatial integral, it would be necessary to compute N4
elements in each time step which is very time-consuming in the case of a good
spatial resolution. The work [13] proposes a fast numerical method that is based
on the DFT and resembles the Ritz-Galerkin method well-established to solve par-
tial differential equations.
As in the previous section, the integral in (1) reads

A(x,t) =

d2y K(

Ω

Z
∞

Z

∞
−
∞

Z

∞
−
τmax

0
Z

=

=

=

d2y

d2y

d2y

Ω

Z

Ω

Z

Ω

Z

dt0δ

✓
dt0L(x

y,t

x
|
x
|

)S

y
|

−
y
−
|
c −

V

(t

−

✓
t0)

x
|

−
c

y

|

−

K(

x
|

−

y
|

◆

y,t

−

−

t0)S[V (y,t0)]

dτL(x

−

y, τ)S[V (y,t

τ)],

−

◆%
)S[V (y,t0)]

(2)

(3)

with τmax = l/p2c, the novel spatial delay kernel L(x, τ) = K(x)δ (
τ) and
|
). These simple calculations show that A may be written
the delta-distribution δ (
·
as a two-dimensional spatial convolution, but with a new delayed spatio-temporal
kernel L that now considers the past activity. The form (2) has been used pre-
viously to study spatio-temporal instabilities in one- and two-dimensional neural
ﬁelds [19].

x
|

/c

−

The new delay kernel L is independent of time t and is computed on the delay
interval only. Hence it represents the contribution of the current and past activity
to the current activity at time t. In addition A implies multiple delays and the
corresponding delay distribution function depends strongly on the spatial kernel
K. In other words, axonal transmission speeds represent a delay distribution as
found before in other contexts [12, 7].

4

K

v∆t

L4

L3

L2

L1

L0

v∆t

t

i m e

Figure 1: The construction of the delay-kernel L(x, τ). Assuming a spatial kernel
(left image), L exhibits rings with radius cτ (images on the right for different delay
times) which is the interaction distance of the system at the delay time τ.

Figure 1 illustrates the construction of the kernel: given the kernel function K in
space (Fig. 1, left), L(x, τ) is generated by cutting out a ring of radius cτ (Fig. 1,
right hand side). In a continuous spatial domain these rings are inﬁnitely thin,
whereas a spatially discretized domain yields ﬁnite ring widths, see the paragraphs
below for more details.

Now let us derive the rules to compute A numerically. The periodic bound-
ary conditions implied lead to discrete wave vectors kmn = (km, kn) with kp =
2π p/l, p

Z0. The Fourier series of V (x,t) reads

2

V (x, y,t) =

1
l

∞
∑
m,n=
−

∞

˜Vmn(t)ei(kmx+kny)

(4)

with the Fourier vector component ˜Vmn(t) = ˜V (km, kn,t) and the spatial Fourier
transform

˜Vmn(t) =

1
l

l/2

l/2

Z

−

dx

l/2

l/2

Z

−

dyV (x, y,t)e−

i(kmx+kny) .

(5)

5

Inserting (4) into (3) and applying (5) leads to

A(x, y,t) =

∞
∑
m,n=
−

∞

ei(kmx+kny)

τmax

0
Z

dT ˜Lmn(T ) ˜Smn(t

T ),

−

(6)

with the spatial Fourier transforms of L(x,t) ˜Lmn(t),
functional S[V (x,t)]. Moreover

˜Smn(t) and the nonlinear

˜Lmn(T ) =

c2
l

l/2c

l/2c

Z

−

l/2c Z
−

l/2c

τ

δ (
|

| −

cτ
T )K(
|

ickmnτ d2τ .

)e−
|

(7)

After obtaining A(x, y,t) in the Fourier space for a continuous spatial domain,
now we discretize the spatial domain to gain the ﬁnal numerical scheme. To this
end, Ω is discretized in a regular spatial grid of N
N elements with grid inter-
val ∆x = l/N. Hence x
1. By virtue of this
discretization, we can approximate (6) and (7) by applying the rectangular rule
∆x ∑N/2
1
b
a)∆x2 f 00(ξ )/24, a < ξ < b
N/2 f (xn). The error is E < (b
a f (x)dx
−
n=
−
for twice-differentiable functions f , i.e.
the rectangular rule is a good approxi-
R
mation for smooth functions and large enough N. The same holds true for the
discretization of the time integral and Eq. (7) reads

⇥
N/2, . . . , N/2

xn = n∆x, n =

!

−

−

−

⇡

˜Lmn(Tu) =

l
N2∆t

N/2
∑
k,p=
−

N/2

Lkp(Tu) e−

i2π(km+np)/N

(8)

with the discrete version of the delay kernel L

Lkp(Tu) = δ (∆τ

k2 + p2, Tu)K(
|

xkp

).

|

) is identical to the Kronecker symbol and is introduced for nota-
The symbol δ (
·
tional convenience. By virtue of the isotropy of the spatial interactions, in addition
we ﬁnd the simple relation

,
·

p

Lkp(Tu) = K(uc∆t).

In other words the width of the rings in Fig. 1 is c∆t. In these latter calculations,
Tu = u∆t
we introduced the time discretization τ kp = (k, p)∆τ, ∆τ = ∆x/c, T
τn.
and δ (τ
Although the relation Lkp(Tu) = K(uc∆t) seems to be quite intuitive and eluci-
dates the discrete ring structure of L, it does not give directly the condition which

δnu/∆t for τ

T )

!

!

!

−

6

grid point (k, p) belongs to which delay ring. This condition may be read off
the Kronecker symbol: u is an integer number and hence δ (∆τ
k2 + p2, Tu) = 1
k2 + p2/∆t] = u with the integer operation [a] that cuts off the decimal
if [∆τ
numbers. Consequently the grid points (k, p) that contribute to the delay time Tu
obey

p

p

∆x
c∆t

u



k2 + p2 < u + 1, u = 0, 1, 2, . . . , umax

p

with umax = [τmax/∆t], i.e. they lie in a ring with inner and outer radius (c∆t/∆x)u
and (c∆t/∆x)(u + 1), respectively.
Moreover, the deﬁnition of Lkp(Tu) allows us to derive some conditions on the nu-
merical parameters. The ring width in Fig.1 is ∆r = c∆t/∆x which is the number
of spatial grid intervals. Hence the maximum radius of a ring is l/p2∆x and hence
the maximum transmission speed that can be implemented is cmax = l/p2∆t.
Since cmax
0, the transmission speed c > cmax in the discrete scheme
is equivalent to an inﬁnite transmission speed in the analytical original model and
the ﬁniteness of cmax results from the time discretization. Moreover, c
cmax
yields τmax
We add that the maximum wave number is kmax = 2π/∆x and, by the deﬁnition of
∆x, the number of Fourier modes is limited to N.
Combining the latter results now Eq. (6) reads

0, i.e. the transmission delay vanishes.

∞ for ∆t

!

!

!

!

A(xr, ys,tv) =

1

ei2π(mr+ns)/N

N/2
−
∑
m,n=
−

N/2

1

umax
−
∑
u=0

⇥

˜Lmn(Tu) ˜Smn(tv

Tu) .

(9)

−

With the standard deﬁnition of the two-dimensional Discrete Fourier Transform

DFT [A]kp = ∑
n,m

Anme−

i2π(nk+mp)/N , n, m

[

2

N/2; N/2

−

1]

−

and its inverse (IDFT) correspondingly, we ﬁnd ﬁnally

A(x,tv) =

l2
N2 IDFT

umax
1
−
∑
u=0

"

DFT [L(Tu)]

DFT [S(tv

⇥

Tu)]

.

#

−

(10)

Some numerical implementations of the DFT assume that the index n runs in the
interval [0; N
1]. In this case, Eq. (10) is also valid but DFT [A]kp is modulated
by a factor e−

−
iπ(k+p) = (

1)k+p.

−

7

In practice, DFT [L(Tu)] is computed once for all Tu in the beginning of the
simulation since it does not depend on the system activity. Moreover, for N =
N , the discrete Fourier Transform may be implemented numerically by
2n, n
a Fast Fourier transform, that speeds up the numerical computation dramatically.
This possible algorithm choice represents the major advantage of the proposed
method compared to other non-convolution methods.

2

The discrete version of A can be applied to any explicit or implicit numerical

integration scheme. For instance, the numerical Euler scheme stipulates

˜Vmn(ti + ∆t) = ˜Vmn(ti) +

∆t
τ
d
∑
u=0

+

∆t
τ

L3
N4

(Imn(ti)

˜Vmn(ti)

−

DFT [L(tu)]mn ⇥

DFT [S(tv

tu)]mn)

−

(11)

where Imn(t) is the Fourier transform of the input I(x,t) and one obtains V (x,tv)
by applying Eq. (4).

In the following, we study analytically and numerically the response to an
external stimulus. At ﬁrst, let us consider a small input. Then the response is
linear about the systems’ stationary state. Since we are interested in responses
that approach the stationary state after removal of the stimulus, it is necessary to
ensure the linear stability of the stationary state.
The stationary state of Eq. (1) constant in space and time implies V0 = κS[V0] + I0
Ω K(x)d2x. Considering small
for a constant input I0 with the kernel norm κ =
additional external inputs ¯I(x,t) = I(x,t)
R
V0 from this stationary state obey

I0, small deviations u(x,t) = V (x,t)

−

−

du(x,t)
dt

=

u(x,t) + ¯I(x,t) + s0

−

K(x

y)u (y,t

Ω

−

x

− |

−

y

/c) dy2. (12)
|

Z
with s0 = δ S[V ]/δV,V = V0. Now expanding u(x,t) into a spatial Fourier series
according to Eq. (4) and applying a temporal Laplace transform to each Fourier
mode amplitude, we ﬁnd the characteristic equation

λ + 1 =

K(x)eikx

λ

x
|

/c d2x
|

−

Ω

Z
with the wave vector k = (km, kn)t and the Lyapunov exponent λ
tionary state V0 is linearly stable if Re(λ ) < 0.

(13)

C . The sta-

2

8

Now let us consider the spatio-temporal response of the system involving the spa-
tially periodic interactions

with

K(x) = Ko

2
∑
i=0

cos(kix) exp(

x

/σ )
|

−|

ki = kc(cos(φi), sin(φi))t , φi = iπ/3 .

This kernel reﬂects spatial hexagonal connections which have been found, e.g., in
layer 2/3 of the visual cortex in monkeys [17]. Stimulating the stable system by
a small external input in the presence of the ﬁnite transmission speed c elucidates
the transmission delay effect on the linear response. This delay effect has at-
tracted some attention in previous studies on the activity propagation in the visual
cortex [18, 4]. For the given kernel, the characteristic equation (13) reads

λ + 1 =

2
∑
i=0

f+(λ , φi) + f

(λ , φi)

−

with

f

±

(λ , φi) = 1/

q

(1/σ + λ /c)2 + k2 + k2

c ±

2kkc cos(φi

3
θ )

−

and k = k(cos(θ ), sin(θ ))t. The numerical simulation applies parameters which
guarantee the stability of the stationary state.
Figure 2 shows snapshots of the simulated spatio-temporal response of the system
about a stable stationary state applying the numerical scheme (11). We observe
the lateral activity propagation starting from the stimulus location in the domain
centre. The spreading activity reveals the maxima of axonal connections close to
previous experimental ﬁndings [17]. To validate the numerical results, we take a
closer look at two single spatial locations, denoted A and B in Fig. 2 at distance
dA and dB from the stimulus location in the center. Before stimulus onset, they
show the stationary activity constant in time. After stimulus onset, it takes the
activity some time to propagate from the stimulus location to these distant points,
e.g. the transmission delays dA/c = 3.3ms and dB/c = 6.2ms. Figure 2 shows that
the activity reaches the locations A and B about these times for the ﬁrst time as
expected. This ﬁnding validates the numerical algorithm proposed above.

9

t=3.30ms

t=3.65ms

t=5.50ms

t=6.20ms

t=8.00ms

x2/σ 2

5.5(V

Figure 2: Spatio-temporal response activity to the external stimulus I(x,t) =
I for the spatial connectivity function K(x) given by the numerical
I0 + e−
simulation of Eq. (1). Used (dimensionless) parameters are Ko = 0.1, c = 10, l =
10, kc = 10π/l, σ = 10, σI = 0.2, N = 512, τ = 1, ∆t = 0.005. Moreover, I0 = 2.0,
3))) and V0 = 2.00083. The initial values are cho-
S[V ] = 2/(1 + exp(
−
sen to V (x, θ ) = V0 for the delay interval
Introducing the
temporal and spatial scale scale τ = 10ms and λ = 1.0mm, the results reﬂect
the spatio-temporal activity with transmission speed c = 1.0m/s and the domain
length l = 10mm, which are realistic values for layer 2/3 in visual cortex. Then
the points A and B are located at a distance dA = 2.1mm and dB = 3.8mm from the
stimulus onset location at the origin, respectively. The bar in the plots is 0.83mm
long.

l/p2c

−

−





0.

θ

We investigate whether the transmission delay induces oscillatory instabilities
in the presence of external input. The following brief numerical study is motivated
by previous theoretical studies on breathers [8]. In that study, the authors com-
puted analytically conditions for Hopf-bifurcations from stimulus-induced stable
standing bumps in a neural model involving spike rate adaption. The presence
of the spike rate adaption permits the occurence of the Hopf-bifurcation. The
corresponding control parameter of these instability studies is the magnitude of
the applied external stimulus. In contrast, the present model does not consider
spike rate adaption to gain a Hopf-bifurcation, but consider tranmsission delays.
We decreases the axonal transmission speed from large speeds, i.e. increases the
transmission delay, to evoke a delay-induced Hopf-bifurcation while keeping the
other parameters constant. Let us assume an anisotropic Gaussian stimulus

I(x,t) = I0e−

xt Σ−

1x/2

⇥

2 diagonal variance matrix Σ−

i , i = 1, 2. Moreover
with the 2
the spatial kernel K(x) represents locally excitatory and laterally inhibitory con-
nections and the transfer function is the Heaviside function S[V ] = H[V
Vthresh].
The numerical computation of Eq. (1) applying the numerical scheme (11) yields

1 with Σ−

1
ii = 1/σ 2

−

10

Figure 3: One cycle of a transmission delay-induced breathers evoked by an
anisotropic external stimulus. The spatial connectivity function is chosen to
r/3)/(18π)
K(r) = 10 exp(
r/7)/(98π) and the input magnitude and
14 exp(
−
−
−
1
1
variances are I0 = 10 and Σ−
11 = 3, Σ−
22 = 5, respectively. Other parameters are
c = 100, l = 30, N = 512, τ = 1, ∆t = 0.05 and Vthresh = 0.005. The initial values
are chosen to V (x, θ ) = 0 for the delay interval

L/p2c

0.

θ

−





delay-induced breathers in two dimensions. Figure 3 shows the temporal sequence
of a single oscillation cycle. To our best knowledge such delay-induced breathers
in two dimensions have not been found before.

4 Conclusion

We have motivated brieﬂy a one-dimensional numerical method to integrate a
spatial integral involving ﬁnite transmission speeds Moreover we have derived
analytically and validated numerically in detail a novel numerical scheme for two-
dimensional neural ﬁelds involving transmission delay that includes a convolution
structure and hence allows the implementation of fast numerical algorithms, such
as Fast Fourier Transform. We have demonstrated numerically a transmission
delay-induced breather [13]. To facilitate future applications of the algorithm, the
implementation code for both numerical examples is made available for down-
load1. We point out that the method can be easily extended to higher dimensions.

In future research, the transmission delay will play an important role in the un-
derstanding of fast activity propagations whose time scales are close to the trans-
mission delay, e.g. in the presence of ultra-fast pulses and/or at spatial nanometer
scales. An open source Graphical User Interface written in Python for a user-

1http://www.loria.fr/˜rougier/research/DNF.html

11

friendly application of the method proposed will be available soon2.

References

[1] F. M. Atay and A. Hutt. Stability and bifurcations in neural ﬁelds with
ﬁnite propagation speed and general connectivity. SIAM J. Appl. Math.,
65(2):644–666, 2005.

[2] F. M. Atay and A. Hutt. Neural ﬁelds with distributed transmission speeds
and constant feedback delays. SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Syst., 5(4):670–698, 2006.

[3] P. C. Bressloff, J. D. Cowan, M. Golubitsky, P. J. Thomas, and M. C. Wiener.
What geometric visual hallucinations tell us about the visual cortex. Neural
Comput., 14:473–491, 2002.

[4] V. Bringuier, F. Chavane, L. Glaeser, and Y. Fregnac. Horizontal propagation
of visual activity in the synaptic integration ﬁeld of area 17 neurons. Science,
283:695–699, 1999.

[5] C. Cattaneo. A form of heat conduction equation which eliminates the para-
dox of instantaneous propagation. Comptes Rendues, 247:431–433, 1958.

[6] S. Coombes. Waves, bumps and patterns in neural ﬁeld theories. Biol. Cy-

bern., 93:91–108, 2005.

[7] G. Faye and O. Faugeras. Some theoretical and numerical results for delayed

neural ﬁeld equations. Physica D, 239:561–578, 2010.

[8] S.E. Folias and P.C. Bressloff. Breathers in two-dimensional excitable neural

media. Phys. Rev. Lett., 95:208107, 2005.

[9] X. Huang, W.C. Troy, S.J. Schiff, Q. Yang, H. Ma, C.R. Laing, and
J.Y. Wu. Spiral waves in disinhibited mammalian neocortex. J.Neurosc.,
24(44):9897–9902, 2004.

[10] A. Hutt. Generalization of the reaction-diffusion, Swift-Hohenberg, and
Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equations and effects of ﬁnite propagation speeds.
Phys. Rev. E, 75:026214, 2007.

2NeuralFieldSimulator: https://gforge.inria.fr/projects/nfsimulator/

12

[11] A. Hutt, M. Bestehorn, and T. Wennekers. Pattern formation in intracortical

neuronal ﬁelds. Network: Comput. Neural Syst., 14:351–368, 2003.

[12] A. Hutt and T.D. Frank. Critical ﬂuctuations and 1/f -activity of neural ﬁelds
involving transmission delays. Acta Phys. Pol. A, 108(6):1021, 2005.

[13] A. Hutt and N. Rougier. Activity spread and breathers induced by

nite transmission speeds in two-dimensional neural
ﬁelds. Phys. Rev. E., 82:R055701, 2010.

[14] J.J. Klossika, U. Gratzke, M. Vicanek, and G. Simon. Importance of a ﬁnite
speed of heat propagation in metals irradiated by femtosecond laser pulses.
Phys.Rev.B, 54(15):10277–10279, 1996.

[15] C.R. Laing. Spiral waves in nonlocal equations. SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Syst.,

4(3):588–606, 2005.

[16] E. Lazzaro and H. Wilhelmsson. Fast heat pulse propagation in hot plasmas.

Phys. Plasmas, 5(4):2830–2835, 1998.

[17] J.S. Lund, A. Angelucci, and P.C. Bressloff. Anatomical substrates for func-
tional columns in macaque monkey primary visual cortex. Cerebral Cortex,
13:15–24, 2003.

[18] L. Schwabe, K. Obermayer, A. Angelucci, and P.C. Bressloff. The role of
feedback in shaping the extra-classical receptive ﬁeld of cortical neurons: a
recurrent network model. J.Neurosci., 26:9117–9126, 2006.

[19] N.A. Venkov, S. Coombes, and P.C. Matthews. Dynamic instabilities in
scalar neural ﬁeld equations with space-dependent delays. Physica D,
232:1–15, 2007.

13

