Konio Pathway: An Instinctive Visual Mechanism for
Survival and Decision Making?
Carlos Carvajal, Thierry Viéville, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Carlos Carvajal, Thierry Viéville, Frédéric Alexandre. Konio Pathway: An Instinctive Visual Mecha-
nism for Survival and Decision Making?. NeuroComp/KEOpS’12 workshop beyond the retina: from
computational models to outcomes in bioengineering. Focus on architecture and dynamics sustaining
information flows in the visuomotor system., Oct 2012, Bordeaux, France. ￿hal-00756471￿

HAL Id: hal-00756471

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00756471

Submitted on 23 Nov 2012

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Konio Pathway: An Instinctive Visual Mechanism for
Survival and Decision Making?

Carlos Carvajal1,2,3, Thierry Vi´eville1,2 and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre1,2
1Inria, Mnemosyne Team, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest
Research Center, 33400 Talence, France
2Universit´e de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives,
UMR 5293, 33000 Bordeaux, France
3Universit´e de Lorraine, Laboratoire Lorraine de Recherche
en Informatique et ses Aplications, UMR 7503,
54600 Villers-l`es-Nancy, France ∗

Abstract

Survival is one of the evolutionary priorities for every species on Earth. It is
strongly linked to making good decisions, even if these are unconsciously made.
In the visual system, interactions between conscious and unconscious processing
have been discussed, depending on the main two information ﬂows originating
from the retina: the Parvo and Magno pathways. We consider here a possible
role of the Konio pathway; less studied and with diﬀerent characteristics, such as
large receptive ﬁelds for global complex event detection, and diﬀuse projections
which may allow to quickly inform several areas in the brain of something im-
portant present in the visual world. To test these hypotheses, we developed a
computational systemic model of the early visual system proposing one type of
Konio cells, which respond to certain spectral patterns and change the dynamics
of the rest of the system accordingly. When examining the model’s responses to
static inputs, we observe that the system exhibits desirable reactions, together
with time cost and eﬃciency characteristics. We also discuss the implications
of the hypotheses for more complete survival and decision making processes, as
the Konio pathway may only be a foundation stone for them in terms of evolution.

Keywords: Konio, visual mechanism, survival, decision making, pathway inter-
play

1

Introduction & Objectives

Physiologically, in the early visual system, the Parvo and Magno pathways are better
understood (Callaway, 2005) than the Konio pathway (Hendry & Reid, 2000). Fur-
thermore, the interactions between these pathways lack understanding. The standard

∗

This work is supported by the ANR/CONICYT KEOpS project, the Lorraine Region and the

CORTINA associated team.
Corresponding author: Carlos Carvajal (carlos.carvajal@inria.fr).

1

Magno and Parvo pathways arrive at the primary visual cortex (V1), and the tempo-
ral and parietal pathways, via the core lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN); whilst the
non-standard konio pathway projects to several cortical areas, but at the same time to
the amygdala via the superior colliculus. The Parvo pathway is associated to details
such as color and shapes, whereas the Magno pathway is related to ﬂashing or mov-
ing images. The Konio pathway has been found in each of the Old World primates
(Hendry & Reid, 2000) and some studies (Yoonesi & Yoonesi, 2011) have proposed that
it may be involved with seasonal mood changes (Glickman, Byrne, Pineda, Hauck, &
Brainard, 2006) and color consistency mechanism (Yoonesi & Kingdom, 2008)(Paul,
Saﬁr, & Tosini, 2009). Whereas these studies propose certain roles, there are 3 Konio
layers to consider, and these studies seem to focus on the middle Konio layer, that
carries information from central blue cones to superﬁcial color blobs in layer 3 of V1
(Hendry & Reid, 2000). Figure 1 sketches their main features, including the matrix
representation in the thalamus for the Konio ﬂow and the thalamic reticular nucleus
(TRN) described as a modulator for thalamo-cortical connections. Depending on the
characteristics that we implement in our computational systemic model for the Konio
pathway, our goal is to investigate how the system changes its dynamics in case the
information signaled the presence of an important natural element in the visual world,
which might be a predator, a possible sexual partner or food.

Figure 1: Overview of the model. An implicit hypothesis here is that the matrix part
of the pulvinar uses an analogous mechanism to that of the Konio cells in the lateral
geniculate nucleus (LGN). Feedback here is considered from cortical layer 6 of V1 and
V2 with a relay at TRN for the core pathway, and from V2 to V1 through superﬁcial
layers.

2 Methods

We built our model from scratch using Python. Its architecture is inspired from the
model proposed by (Rodriguez, Whitson, & Granger, 2004)(Granger, 2006), and con-

2

siders facts from other studies, including (Callaway, 1998)(Callaway, 2004)(Callaway,
2005)(Sherman, 2007)(Masland & Martin, 2007)(Nassi & Callaway, 2009).

Its implementation is based on three-dimensional Gabor ﬁlters for cortical levels,
on Diﬀerence of Gaussians ﬁlters for core thalamic structures, and on a statistical
analysis of oriented features for the matrix thalamus. We only worked with horizontal
and vertical orientations for simplicity.

The input to the system corresponds to a series of black & white images of 324x324
px, which are treated (in detail) 3 times, as a saccadic movement is done about 3 times
per second (Ballard, Hayhoe, Pool, & Rao, 1997) and humans may process complex
natural images in about 120[ms] (Thorpe, Fize, & Marlot, 1996)(VanRullen & Thorpe,
2001).

Figure 2 shows how artiﬁcial inputs are analyzed by the system topographically by
extracting patterns. The global analysis made by the Konio system allows to choose
the order of the hierarchical decomposition, whereas the TRN inhibits information
already analyzed.

The output of the system is a series of messages that represent a certain motor
output (Figure 3). They are based on the result of a pattern recognition from the
Konio, V1 and V2 information, and in how critical this pattern is for the system.

3 Results

We have postulated that our system analyzes 3 times a frame, and that we have
diﬀerent criticality parameters for diﬀerent stimuli. One of the ﬁrst tests that we did
then was to check whether the model could extract the patterns following a certain
order given the responses from the proposed Konio cells and how critical this pattern
was for the system. For this, we created a fake pattern that contained 3 others, which
were the ones interesting for our model. To do this we consider only the cell activation
maps1 at every level rather than to also consider the motor output. It is validated
that the system prioritizes critical patterns if found and just then passes to less critical
options if found. Already analyzed patterns are inhibited through cortical feedback
relaying at the thalamic reticular nucleus to allow for a less costly treatment. Figure
2 shows this process.

Another needed study was noise resistance to test the capability of the system to
demonstrate that a more developed system is needed as the processing undertaken
by the Konio cells is global and simple so it can arrive at the desired areas without
spending too much time at the thalamus. Figure 3 shows this process, where a non-
critical pattern is used to reﬂect the idea that the system allows itself to wait for a
more detailed representation as the error at lower visual levels is too high to recognize
the pattern as present. This ﬁgure also shows that the simulation time for the Konio
mechanism proposed here is about 4 times faster than the Parvo mechanism imple-
mented, which was expected as its goals are to communicate a simple information to
several areas of the brain, either to trigger a defensive action, or to bias the conscious
visual processing as something naturally interesting seems to be present.

1

A map that shows cell activation rather than to show the visual representation at that stage of

the system.

3

Figure 2: Pattern extraction and hierarchical decomposition. Using 3 konio cells of
the proposed type and a fake pattern as input, that contains the 3 interesting sub-
patterns, we observe how the model analyzes the frame one pattern at a time (T-P-U
here), inhibiting what has been already analyzed at each iteration. A The 3 interesting
patterns. B Rows: Each iteration for the single frame in A. Columns: Input, cell
mapping at V1 and V2, and the remainder after extracting the analyzed pattern.

Figure 3: Detail & Motor output. The system recognizes the pattern and triggers
an action depending on how critical the pattern is. Top: Input and cell activation
mapping at V1 and V2. Bottom: Reduced set of messages produced by the motor
output block.

4

4 Discussion

The Konio pathway has been found in each of the Old World primates (Hendry &
Reid, 2000).
It projects to higher cortical stages and to the amygdala via the su-
perior colliculus. This connection is relevant as the superior colliculus has a role in
responses to events and emergencies (Dean, Redgrave, & Westby, 1989), and the amyg-
dala (LeDoux, 2008) is involved in several cognitive and behavioral functions, such
as attention, explicit and emotional memory, and decision making (Gupta, Koscik,
Bechara, & Tranel, 2011). We have not yet addressed these structures nor their links,
but we’re keen to study them as the Konio pathway is just one starting point for them.

5 Conclusions and Perspectives

Our model shows that architectural and functional of characteristics of the Konio
system can bring ﬂexibility to a local and hierarchical analysis of the perceptive world.
These properties could be replicated at higher levels of the matrix system, like in the
pulvinar. It might be also important to consider other crucial extra-cortical inputs like
the ones stemming from the superior colliculus or the amygdala.

Perspectives

• Work with natural images.

• Extend the model to higher cortical areas and the Magno pathway to account

for motion.

• Include the path to the amygdala to exploit, e.g., higher level decision making

processes.

• Enhance the model to further study the interactions between pathways and the

role of the other layers of Konio cells.

• Examine other stages of the food chain: how a predator would be helped by such

a prewired network, and the duality (being and having predators).

• Explore diﬀerent disorders (Yoonesi & Yoonesi, 2011) to which the visual path-
ways (Parvo, Magno and Konio) are related, such as multiple sclerosis (Murav’eva,
Deshkovich, & Shelepin, 2009)(Thurtell et al., 2009), schizophrenia (Delord et
al., 2006)(Butler & Javitt, 2005), Parkinson’s (Silva et al., 2005) and Alzheimer’s
(Guo, Duggan, & Cordeiro, 2010)(Sartucci et al., 2010) disease, and many others
(Gutowski, Heron, & Scase, 1997)(Papia et al., 2010).

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the ANR/CONICYT KEOpS project, the Lorraine Region
and the CORTINA associated team.

5

References

Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pool, P. K., & Rao, R. P. N. (1997). Deictic codes for
the embodiment of cognition (with commentary). Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
20 (4), 723–767.

Butler, P. D., & Javitt, D. C.

(2005). Early-stage visual processing deﬁcits in

schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 18 (2), 151–157.

Callaway, E. M. (1998). Local circuits in primary visual cortex of the macaque monkey.

Annual Review of Neuroscience, 21 , 47–74.

Callaway, E. M. (2004). Feedforward, feedback and inhibitory connections in primate

visual cortex. Neural Networks, 17 (5-6), 625–632.

Callaway, E. M. (2005). Structure and function of parallel pathways in the primate

early visual system. Journal of Physiology, 566 (Pt 1), 13–19.

Dean, P., Redgrave, P., & Westby, G. W. (1989). Event or emergency? two response
systems in the mammalian superior colliculus. Trends in Neurosciences, 12 (4),
137–147.

Delord, S., Ducato, M. G., Pins, D., Devinck, F., Thomas, P., Boucart, M., et al.
(2006). Psychophysical assessment of magno- and parvocellular function in
schizophrenia. Visual Neuroscience, 23 (3-4), 645–650.

Glickman, G., Byrne, B., Pineda, C., Hauck, W. W., & Brainard, G. C.

(2006).
Light therapy for seasonal aﬀective disorder with blue narrow-band light-emitting
diodes (leds). Biological Psychiatry, 59 (6), 502–507.

Granger, R. (2006). Engines of the brain: the computational instruction set of human

cognition. AI Magazine, 27 (2), 15–32.

Guo, L., Duggan, J., & Cordeiro, M. F. (2010). Alzheimers disease and retinal neu-

rodegeneration. Current Alzheimer Research, 7 (1), 3–14.

Gupta, R., Koscik, T. R., Bechara, A., & Tranel, D.

(2011). The amygdala and

decision making. Neuropsychologia, 49 (4), 760–766.

Gutowski, N. J., Heron, J. R., & Scase, M. O. (1997). Early impairment of foveal
magno- and parvocellular pathways in juxta chiasmal tumours. Vision Research,
37 (10), 1401–1408.

Hendry, S. H., & Reid, R. C. (2000). The koniocellular pathway in primate vision.

Annual Review of Neuroscience, 23 (1), 127–153.
LeDoux, J. E. (2008). Amygdala. Scholarpedia, 3 (4), 2698.
Masland, R. H., & Martin, P. R. (2007). The unsolved mystery of vision. Current

Biology, 17 (15), R577–R582.

Murav’eva, S. V., Deshkovich, A. A., & Shelepin, Y. E. (2009). The human magno
and parvo systems and selective impairments of their functions. Neuroscience
and Behavioral Physiology, 39 (6), 535–543.

Nassi, J. J., & Callaway, E. M. (2009). Parallel processing strategies of the primate

visual system. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 10 (5), 360–372.

Papia, M. F., Burke, M. W., Zangenehpour, S., Palmour, R. M., Ervin, F. R., & Ptito,
M. (2010). Reduced soma size of the m-neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus
following foetal alcohol exposure in non-human primates. Experimental Brain
Research, 205 (2), 263–271.

Paul, K. N., Saﬁr, T. B., & Tosini, G. (2009). The role of retinal photoreceptors in the

6

regulation of circadian rhythms. Reviews in Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders,
10 (4), 271–278.

Rodriguez, A., Whitson, J., & Granger, R. (2004). Derivation and analysis of ba-
sic computational operations of thalamocortical circuits. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16 (5), 856–877.

Sartucci, F., Borghetti, D., Bocci, T., Murri, L., Orsini, P., Porciatti, V., et al. (2010).
Dysfunction of the magnocellular stream in alzheimer’s disease evaluated by pat-
tern electroretinograms and visual evoked potentials. Brain Research Bulletin,
82 (3-4), 169–176.

Sherman, S. M. (2007). The thalamus is more than just a relay. Current Opinion in

Neurobiology, 17 (4), 417–422.

Silva, M. F., Faria, P., Regateiro, F. S., Forjaz, V., Janu´ario, C., Freire, A., et al.
(2005). Independent patterns of damage within magno-, parvo- and koniocellular
pathways in parkinsons disease. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 128 (Pt 10),
2260–2271.

Thorpe, S., Fize, D., & Marlot, C. (1996). Speed of processing in the human visual

system. Nature, 381 (6582), 520–522.

Thurtell, M. J., Bala, E., Yaniglos, S. S., Rucker, J. C., Peachey, N. S., & Leigh, R. J.
(2009). Evaluation of optic neuropathy in multiple sclerosis using low-contrast
visual evoked potentials. Neurology, 73 (22), 1849–1857.

VanRullen, R., & Thorpe, S. J. (2001). The time course of visual processing: from
early perception to decision-making. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13 (4),
454–461.

Yoonesi, A., & Kingdom, F. A. A. (2008). Comparison of sensitivity to color changes
in natural and phase-scrambled scenes. Journal of the Optical Society of America
A, 25 (3), 676–684.

Yoonesi, A., & Yoonesi, A. (2011). Functional assessment of magno, parvo and konio-
cellular pathways; current state and future clinical applications. Journal of Oph-
talmic and Vision Research, 6 (2), 119–126.

7

