Shader-Based Antialiased Dashed Stroked Polylines
Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier. Shader-Based Antialiased Dashed Stroked Polylines. Journal of Computer Graph-
ics Techniques, 2013, 2 (2), pp.91-107. ￿hal-00907326￿

HAL Id: hal-00907326

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00907326

Submitted on 21 Nov 2013

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

Shader-Based Antialiased

Dashed Stroked Polylines

Nicolas P. Rougier
INRIA, Université de Bordeaux, IMN UMR CNRS 5293, Labri, UMR 5800 CNRS
Bordeaux, France

Figure 1. These dashed stroked paths are computed in the fragment shader and do not require
extra tessellation. This allows changing line width, line joins, dash pattern and dash phase at
no extra cost.

Abstract

Dashed stroked paths are a widely-used feature found in the vast majority of vector drawing
software and libraries. They allow, for example, highlighting a given path such as the cur-
rent selection in drawing software or distinguishing curves in the case of a scientiﬁc plotting
package. This paper introduces a shader-based method for rendering arbitrary dash patterns
along any continuous polyline (smooth or broken). The proposed method does not tessellate
individual dash patterns and allows for fast and nearly accurate rendering of any user-deﬁned
dash pattern and caps. Benchmarks indicates a slowdown ratio between 1.1 and 2.1 with an
increased memory consumption between 3 and 6. Furthermore, the method can be used for
solid thick polylines with correct caps and joins with only a slowdown of factor 1.1.

1

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

1.

Introduction

During the past decade, a lot of progress has been made in GPU-accelerated resolution-
independent 2D graphics (a.k.a. vector graphics) and methods have been provided for
antialiased lines ([Chan and Durand 2005]), Bézier curves, glyph rendering, vector
and more recently, generic path rendering ([Kilgard and Bolz 2012]). However, to
our best knowledge, few concerns have been given to dashed strokes even though
it is a widely-used feature found in vector drawing software and libraries. Dashed
strokes were also present in the ﬁrst OpenGL API speciﬁcations through the line
stipple functionality was been deprecated. Several alternatives have been provided
such as sketchy strokes ([Markosian et al. 1997]), stylized lines ([Bénard et al. 2010;
Cole and Finkelstein 2010]) or approximated dashes, but only the path rendering ap-
proach seems to offer correct dashing according to the deﬁnition of the standard vec-
tor graphic format (SVG 1.1). Implementation details have been given sparingly, but
[Kilgard 2011] seems to indicate that dashed strokes are ﬁrst converted into segment
sequences (6 triangles / dash), which is usually done in most vector libraries. Con-
sequently, this approach requires a pre-processing stage on the CPU each time a new
dash pattern is used (if the dash period is different) or if the dash phase changes. The
resulting number of triangles is linearly correlated with the number of visible dashes.
Even if the number of triangles remains relatively low compared to the capability of
modern graphic cards, the pre-processing stage is cumbersome if one wants to ani-
mate the dash pattern as is done in most drawing software where the active selection
is animated in order to make it salient.

This paper introduces a new method for rendering dash stroked antialiased poly-
lines using the GPU, a very light pre-processing stage and without extra tessellation.
The speciﬁc contributions are:

A dash atlas for efﬁcient texture-based storage of dash patterns

A shader-based rendering algorithm for dash patterns along a polyline

•

•

Since a solid line is a singular case of dashing, the method is valid for rendering thick
solid antialiased polylines with correct caps and joins without the need to tessellate
the joins.

2. Dashes

A dash pattern is deﬁned as a cyclic sequence of successive on (dash) and off (gap)
segments of variable lengths as illustrated in ﬁgure 2. The period ω of a dash pattern
is deﬁned as the sum of all the on and off segments. The dash phase φ corresponds
to the length by which the dash is shifted at the start. On segments have caps at their
start and end, overlapping the off segment if necessary. If the off segment is not large

2

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

enough, start and end caps may overlap (the user has to take care of this when deﬁning
a dash pattern).

φ (phase)

ω (period)

A

B

on (or dash)

off (or gap)

Figure 2. A thick dashed line between point A and B, with round caps (light blue areas) and
a non-null dash phase.

3. Anti-aliased solid lines

Before diving in dash lines rendering, we need to expose the rendering of antialiased
thick solid lines since the dash rendering techniques relies on it. Chan and Durand
introduced an antialiasing technique for lines [Chan and Durand 2005]. Results are
hardware-independent and ensures consistent line antialiasing across different GPUs
while keeping implementations both fast and easy. Since then, several variants have
been proposed but the main idea remains the same. We use a slightly different tech-
nique that differs mainly in the way line is parameterized. Let us consider a thick line
between a point A and a point B with thickness w and a desired ﬁlter radius of size r
as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.

B0

r

u

w

T

O
A

B

v

f ragment

B1

A0

A1

Figure 3. A thick line between A and B with round caps, thickness w and ﬁlter radius r. Using
+ d
d = ceil(w + 2.5r), the domain of the (u, v) parameterization is given by
and

AB
k

≤ k

≤

−

d

u

d

+d.

v

−

≤

≤

3

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

3.1. Body

The line is tessellated as two triangles (A0, A1, B0) and (A1, B1, B0) with texture coor-
dinates (u, v) that represent the point coordinates in the Cartesian coordinate system
A, T, O
. The hardware rasterizer must generate all the fragments associated with
{
}
a wide line. [Chan and Durand 2005] proposed to use an actual thickness equal to
ceil(w + 2r)√2 that may be excessively large; instead, we use ceil(w + 2.5r). When
line thickness is below 1 pixel, the actual thickness is kept to 1 pixel while the alpha
component of the color is decreased accordingly to simulate thickness below 1. The
distance of any fragment to the actual line is given by the absolute value of the v
texture coordinate.

3.2. Caps

Knowing the segment length l =
to ﬁnd what part the fragment belongs to:

AB
k
k

and using the (u, v) parameterization, it is easy

if u < 0, the fragment is situated in the start cap area

if u > l, the fragment is situated in the end cap area

•

•

u

if 0

l, the fragment is situated in the body area

•

≤

≤
Using dx =
, dy =
controlled using the different formulas presented in table 1.

min(u, u

v
|

−

l)

|

|

|

when u < 0 or u > l, the shape of the cap can be

None
Butt
Square
Round
Triangle out
Triangle in

2r, dy)

−

∞

d = +
(no cap)
d = max(dx + w/2
d = max(dx, dy)
d = pdx2 + dy2
d = dx + dy
d = max(dy, w/2

r + dx

dy)

−

−

Table 1. Line caps and their corresponding formulas.

The computed distance d is then used to decide if a fragment belongs to the seg-
2 ) while for the actual segment body, we use the distance

w

ment (d
d =

v
|

|

2 ) or not (d > w
≤
as explained earlier.

4. Dash atlas

To draw dashes inside the segment body, we need to know if a given fragment (u, v)
belongs to a dash cap area (start or end), to the dash body or is in a gap area. Then, it

4

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

is easy to decide if a fragment needs to be rendered or discarded, using tests similar
to the ones for the start/end line segment caps and body. The idea is thus to ﬁnd the
reference point u∗ to which to compute the distance to.

u

∗
2

v

u
A

u

∗
0

u

∗
1

∗
u
2

B

s1

s2

s3

s4

s5

s6

Figure 4. A thick dashed line between point A and B showing the reference points.

Consider ﬁgure 4 and the (u, v) coordinate of a fragment. Since the dash pattern is
cyclic with a dash period ω, we can immediately compute the quantity u = u mod ω.
If u lies between the start and end of the same dash, then we consider the reference
point to be u. Otherwise, we consider the reference point to be the nearest dash end
or start. For example in ﬁgure 4, all fragments such that u
0 as reference
∈
point while all fragments such that u
s3 uses themselves as reference points. Such a
function can easily be stored in a single texture row that indicate where is the reference
point according to the normalized u coordinate as illustrated on ﬁgure 5.

s2 use u∗

∈

u∗

ω

2,2,1,1,1,1

u∗

ω

2,2,0,2

uω

ω

u

2

2

1

1

1

1

2

2

0

2

Figure 5. Examples of functions encoding the dash reference point u∗ as a function of u for a
given dash pattern.

However, this information is not sufﬁcient to render a dash because we also need
to know if a given reference point u∗ refers to a cap start, a cap end or to the dash body.
We could use the sign of the information to distinguish between cap start and cap end
and use the null value to indicate a dash body (since in this case, we can use the u
value) but we’ll see later that the start and the end points of the current dash need to
be stored as well (for broken polylines as opposed to smooth polylines, even though
both are continuous). We will use a two-dimensional RGBA ﬂoating-point texture in
order to store information relative to a dash pattern using the following structure:

R - Reference point (u∗)

•

5

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

G - Dash subtype (start cap, body or end cap)

B - Dash start

A - Dash end

•

•

•

A dash pattern can thus be stored as a row in this two-dimensional texture. This
allows an arbitrary large number of dash patterns stored in a single texture that can be
re-used for any dashed stroke.

5. Rendering

5.1. 2D Line segment

Rendering a line segment requires distinguishing between all the aforementioned
cases as illustrated in ﬁgure 6:

1. The fragment belongs to a dash that ends before a line start

2. The fragment belongs to a dash that starts after a line stop

3. The fragment is before a line start and the dash extends across a line start

4. The fragment is after a line stop and the dash extends across a line stop

5. The fragment belongs to a dash cap start

6. The fragment belongs to a dash cap stop

7. The fragment belongs to a dash body

u∗
−1

7

u∗
0

A

u∗
1

u∗
2

1

5

6

u∗
4

u∗
3

B

4

Figure 6. A dashed pattern between points A and B. The corresponding triangulation is shown
as dashed lines and some fragment positions have been marked whose corresponding tests can
be found in the listing 1. Not all tests are displayed because the displayed dash pattern does
not need tests 2 and 3. The lighter blue thick dashed line corresponds to the uncorrected dash
pattern, i.e. if the line was inﬁnite in both directions.

The corresponding fragment shader is in listing 1.

6

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

uniform sampler2D dash\_atlas;
uniform float
uniform float
uniform vec2
uniform vec4

dash\_index, dash\_phase, dash\_period;
linelength, linewidth, antialias;
caps, texcoord;
color;

int main() {

float w = linewidth;
float freq = w\*dash\_period;
float u = texcoord.x;
float v = texcoord.y;
float u\_ = mod( u + w\*dash\_phase, freq );
vec4 dash = texture2D(dash\_atlas, vec2(u\_/freq, dash\_index));
float dash\_ref
= dash.x;
float dash\_type = dash.y;
float dash\_start = (u - u\_) + w \* dash.z;
float dash\_stop = (u - u\_) + w \* dash.w;
float line\_start = 0.0;
float line\_stop = linelength;
bool cross\_start = (dash\_start <= line\_start) &&
(dash\_stop
bool cross\_stop = (dash\_stop

>= line\_start);
>= line\_stop) &&

float t = linewidth/2.0 - antialias;

(dash\_start <= line\_stop);

// Default distance to the line body (7)
float d = abs(v);
// Dash stop is before line start
if( dash\_stop <= line\_start )

discard;

// Dash start is beyond line stop
else if( dash\_start >= line\_stop )

discard;

// Dash is across line start and fragment before line start (1)
else if( (u <= line\_start) && (cross\_start) )

d = cap( caps.x, u, v, t);

// Dash is across line stop and fragment after line stop (4)
else if( (u >= line\_stop) && (cross\_stop) )
d = cap( caps.y, u - line\_stop, v, t );

// Dash cap start (5)
else if( dash\_type < 0.0 )

d = cap( caps.y, u-dash\_ref, v, t );

// Dash cap stop (6)
else if( dash\_type > 0.0 )

d = cap( caps.x, dash\_ref-u, v, t );

// Antialias test
d -= t;
if( d < 0.0 ) {

7

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

gl\_FragColor = color;

} else {

d /= antialias;
gl\_FragColor = vec4(color.rgb, exp(-d\*d)\*color.a);

}

}

Listing 1. Line fragment code

The cap function, show in listing 2, is a direct translation of table 1.

// t = linewidth/2.0 - antialias;
float cap( float type, float u, float v, float t )
{

( type < 0.5 ) discard;

// None
if
// Round
else if ( abs(type - 1.0) < 0.5 ) return sqrt(u\*u+v\*v);
// Triangle out
else if ( abs(type - 2.0) < 0.5 ) return max(abs(v),(t+u-abs(v)));
// Triangle in
else if ( abs(type - 3.0) < 0.5 ) return (u+abs(v));
// Square
else if ( abs(type - 4.0) < 0.5 ) return max(u,v);
// Butt
else if ( abs(type - 5.0) < 0.5 ) return max(u+t,v);

discard;

}

Listing 2. Cap function

5.2. 2D Polylines without folding

Pi
{

Rendering a polyline without folding, i.e. no self intersection between consecutive
segments, requires considering the angle between two consecutive line segments in
order to decide whether they are considered continuous or broken. Let us consider a
}i∈[1,n]. An open path O is described by the set of line segments
set of n points
}i∈[1,n−1]. A closed path C is described by the set of line segments O
PnP1.
PiPi+1
{
To tessellate the path into a thick stroke, for each segment Pi−1Pi, we have to consider
respective angles αi−1 = ∠Pi−2Pi−1Pi and αi = ∠Pi−1PiPi+1. If the path is closed,
we set α0 = 0 and αn = 0; if the path is open, we have α0 = ∠PnP0P1 and αn =
∠Pn−1PnP0. Depending on whether angle αi is greater or lesser than an arbitrary
chosen angle αlim > 0 (that has been set to 10◦ in the supplemental material), P0
i and
P1
i must be set accordingly as illustrated in ﬁgure 7. αlim represents de facto the limit
under which we consider the curve to be C1 continuous even though, mathematically,
it is not.

∪

8

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

P0
i−1

Pi−1

P1
i−1

P0
i−1

Pi−1

P1
i−1

Pi−1

Pi

αi

Pi+1

Pi−1

Pi

Pi+1

P0
i

Pi

P1
i

P0
i

Pi

P1
i

Figure 7. Connecting two thick line segments with overlap when αi
(bottom).

≥

αlim (top) or no overlap

If two consecutive lines are continuous, so is the dash pattern. If two consecutive
line segments are broken, we stop and restart the dash pattern accordingly. The difﬁ-
culty using this approach is to keep the overall dash pattern consistent across all the
segments as illustrated in ﬁgure 8.

B

A

Figure 8. For broken angles, one has to take care to not start a dash pattern before the start of
the current line segment (A) or beyond the end of the current line segment (B) or unaesthetic
artifacts will result.

We thus need to make sure that:

a new dash pattern does not start beyond the current segment end (case A in
ﬁgure 8)

a dash pattern does not end before the actual segment start (case B on ﬁgure 8)

•

•

For any dash, we have to know anytime where it starts and where it ends. Fortunately,
this information is in the dash atlas (in the blue and alpha channel respectively). The

9

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

corresponding shaders can be found in the supplemental materials. The full dash
shader code takes into account the type of join (round, miter, bevel) and renders it
without any extra tessellation.

Figure 9. Broken polylines with different joins, dash patterns and periods.

5.3. 2D polylines with folding

The case of folded thick polylines can be solved by ﬁrst unfolding the polyline using
the algorithm introduced in [Asente 2010] and then applying the previous cases.

5.4. 3D polylines without folding

The 3D case is very similar to the 2D case if we consider a line as always facing the
camera. That is, we consider a line segment in the 3D space to be deﬁned as two
points and a line thickness. This is different from, for example, a thick and ﬂat ribbon
that would have an orientation in space. Using line impostors, we can easily compute
the 4 vertices that constitute the line. Figure 11 shows dashed 3D line segments while
ﬁgure show the case of a continuous polyline around a sphere. Note the different
apparent thickness of the lines depending on perspective.

6. Benchmarks

Benchmarks were performed on a Macbook Pro Retina 15-inch (early 2013), with
2.7Ghz Intel Core i7, 16GB 1600 MHz DDR3, NVIDIA GeForce GT 650M (1024
Mo) using OSX 10.9 (Mavericks) and a modiﬁed GLUT1 version to take HiDPI into
account.

1available from http://iihm.imag.fr/blanch/software/glut-macosx/

10

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

Figure 10. In some cases, folded thick polylines can be unfolded. The thick polyline can then
be considered continuous and the previous case applies.

Figure 11. Left. The Stanford bunny rendered with dashed line segments. Right. Icosahedron
rendered with dashed hidden line segments.

6.1. Speed

Rendering speed was measured using the total time to render 10,000 line segments
of apparent width of 1 pixel for a total of 1,000 frames. The cost of rendering these
frames with no lines was subtracted and divided by the number of frames. The ref-
erence time corresponds to the raw method that builds thick line segments using 2

11

FoldedUnfoldedSubmitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

triangles with no caps nor antialiasing. The solid method corresponds to a dedicated
shader that handles only solid lines with caps, joins and antialiasing. The dash solid
method corresponds to the shader program that handles dashed or solid lines with
caps, joins and antialias. However, in this case, the rendering beneﬁts from some
internal optimizations due to the solid nature of the line. The dash dotted method
corresponds to the full shader program but the line is rendered using a dot pattern that
slows down rendering.

Method
No rendering
Raw
Solid
Dash solid
Dash dotted

Total time Average time Slowdown factor
0.671 (s)
18.427 (s)
20.338 (s)
20.387 (s)
37.872 (s)

17.756 (ms)
19.667 (ms)
19.716 (ms)
37.201 (ms)

1.00
1.10
1.10
2.10

×
×
×
×

Table 2. Speed benchmarks for the three main rendering methods (code is available from the
supplemental materials) for an apparent line thickness of 1.

Finally, I measured how the technique scales with the actual line width. Rendering
speed was measured using the total time to render 1,000 line segments with a varying
line width between 1 and 51 for a total of 1000 frames. The cost of rendering these
frames with no lines was subtracted and ﬁgure 12 shows a linear correlation between
the line width and the time to render.

Figure 12. The time to render line segments with increasing line widths is linearly correlated
with the line width.

12

01020304050Line width in pixel0510152025Time (ms)Time to render 1000 line segments with varying linewidthRawSolidDash-SolidDash-DottedSubmitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

6.2. Memory

In a polyline of n points, the minimum number of vertices to render a thick polyline is
2n using a triangle strip structure. In my case, I cannot use such structure since I need
to parameterize vertices depending on their relative position in the current segment
(start or end position). For example, if we consider three points A, B and C, I need
to handle case where B is the end of segment AB and case where B is the start of
segment BC. A polyline is thus rendered using triangles resulting in 4n
4 vertices.
Furthermore, a vertex needs to be augmented with several types of data in order to
render dashes, joins and caps as shown in listing 3.

−

typedef struct {

vec2 position;
vec2 segment;
vec2 angles;
vec4 tangents;
vec2 texcoord;

} vtype;

// vertex position
// vertex curvilinear coordinates
// angles with previous and next segment
// tangents with previous and next vertex
// Texture coordinates

Listing 3. Vertex type

Compared to a raw thick polyline rendering where only the vertex position and texture
3 increase in memory consump-
coordinate are needed (4 ﬂoats), this represents a
tion. The overall increase in memory consumption, taking into account the number of
vertices and the memory size of a vertex is then of a factor
6 compared to the raw
line rendering.

×

×

6.3. Dynamic lines

As explained previously, a vertex needs to be instrumented with several information,
then a polyline can be modiﬁed in a number of ways that do not require any extra
computation or tessellation as illustrated on table 3. The partial update is due to if a
single point of a polyline is changed, this only requires updating:

1. Vertices’ information related to these points (4 vertices)

2. Immediate neighbors’ tangents and angles information (4 vertices)

3. segment information for all subsequent vertices

The only case where all information for all vertices need to be computed is when all
the points are changed at once.

7. Conclusion

Our method suffers from several errors and limitations. First, dash caps are curved
to follow the contour instead of being rendered independently of the curvature. The

13

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

Property
Rotation
Zoom
Line caps
Line thickness
Join type
Dash pattern
Dash phase
Dash caps
Point modiﬁcation

CPU dash
X
X
X

GPU dash
X
X
X
X
X
(period-dependent) X
X
X

×
×
×
×
X

×

(partial update)

×

Table 3. Table summarizing which property can be changed without the need for a new
tessellation depending on the technique.

Open XML Paper Speciﬁcation deﬁnes 4 types of caps: ﬂat, square, round, and
triangle. In all 4 cases, the boundaries of the caps

... are not curved to follow the contour, but are transformed using the
effective render transform.

As illustrated in ﬁgure 13, this means that there exist paths where the caps are not
fully contained within the envelope of the stroked path.

Figure 13. Left Square dash caps rendered following the Open XML speciﬁcation. Note
that caps are not fully contained within the stroke envelope. Right Approximated square dash
caps that are fully contained within the stroke envelope and follow the contour curvature.

Our method does not follow this speciﬁcation; instead dash caps are rendered as
illustrated on the right part of the ﬁgure 13. This is not noticeable for straight lines,
hardly noticeable for thin lines but becomes visible for thick lines, especially in the
vicinity of high curvature. It is thus wrong according to the Open XML speciﬁcation.

A second and more serious problem is that broken polylines create self-intersection
areas, which result in artifacts when the stroke is painted using a transparent color.
This can be partially ﬁxed using the stencil buffer, but this also creates new artifacts

14

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

when antialiasing the line. This could also be ﬁxed directly from within the frag-
ment shader (by considering which segment is responsible for actually painting the
join section) but I suspect this would add considerable complexity to the shader and
I did not test it. Third, the dash pattern period cannot exceed the width of the dash
atlas texture or this would bring severe imprecision during the rendering stage. Most
common dash pattern periods are generally below 10 or 20 times the line width, and
a texture width of 1024 pixels ensures more than enough precision. If one needs a
very long dash period, it would become necessary to interpolate the texture over two
or more consecutive lines.

Last, a fully antialiased, correctly joined, dashed line is roughly 2 times slower
than a raw thick line. However, given the quality of the output and considering the
fact that dash patterns are generally used scarcely in a given scene, the versatility and
the ease of use may be worth considered as an alternative solution: line width, line
caps, joins types, dash pattern, dash caps and dash phase can be all changed at no
extra cost. Finally, the proposed implementation (in supplemental material) does not
use geometry shaders, which are not available in OpenGL ES 3.0 or WebGL 1.0, even
if the baking process could be made entirely on a geometry shader, hence offering a
modern way of replacing the deprecated stipple GL feature without the need for any
extract code on the CPU side.

References

ASENTE, P. J. 2010. Folding avoidance in skeletal strokes. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Sketch-Based Interfaces and Modeling Symposium, Eurographics Association, SBIM ’10,
33–40. 9

BÉNARD, P., COLE, F., GOLOVINSKIY, A., AND FINKELSTEIN, A. 2010. Self-similar
texture for coherent line stylization. In Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on
Non-Photorealistic Animation and Rendering, ACM, 91–97. 2

CHAN, E., AND DURAND, F. 2005. GPU Gems II: Programming Techniques for High-
Performance Graphics and General-Purpose Computation . Addison-Wesley Professional,
ch. 22. Fast Preﬁltered Lines, 345–369. 2, 3

COLE, F., AND FINKELSTEIN, A. 2010. Two Fast Methods for High-Quality Line Visibility.

IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16, 5, 707–717. 2

KILGARD, M., AND BOLZ, J. 2012. GPU-accelerated Path Rendering. ACM Transactions

on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH Asia 2012) 31, 6. 2

KILGARD, M., 2011. Conversion of Dashed Strokes into Quadratic Bézier Segment Se-

quences. Patent application number: 20110285723. 2

MARKOSIAN, L., KOWALSKI, M. A., TRYCHIN, S. J., BOURDEV, L. D., GOLDSTEIN, D.,
AND HUGHES, J. F. 1997. Real-Time Nonphotorealistic Rendering. In SIGGRAPH 97
Conference Proceedings, 415–420. 2

15

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

Index of Supplemental Materials

Supplied code

The supplied python code demonstrates various dash lines in 2D and 3D. It requires the numpy
library available from: http://numpy.scipy.org and the OpenGL python bindings
available from: http://pyopengl.sourceforge.net All the screenshots from the
article are available from the demo executable scripts. The code is BSD licensed and the
README ﬁle explains each ﬁle.

Screenshots

Movies

Movies of animated demos are available from:

http://www.loria.fr/ rougier/tmp/sphere.mov

http://www.loria.fr/ rougier/tmp/stars.mov

http://www.loria.fr/ rougier/tmp/tiger.mov

http://www.loria.fr/ rougier/tmp/icosahedron.mov

•

•

•

•

Author Contact Information

Nicolas P. Rougier
Mnemosyne, INRIA Bordeaux - Sud Ouest
LaBRI, UMR 5800 CNRS, Bordeaux University
Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases, UMR 5293
351, Cours de la Libération
33405 Talence Cedex, France
Nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr
http://www.loria.fr/~rougier

Nicolas P. Rougier, GPU-Accelerated Dashed Stroked Polylines, Journal of Computer Graph-
ics Techniques (JCGT), vol. ?, no. ?, 1–1, ????
????

Received:
Recommended:
Published:

November 9, 2013
????-??-??
????-??-??

Corresponding Editor: ??? ???
Editor-in-Chief:

Name

???? Nicolas P. Rougier (the Authors).

c
(cid:13)
The Authors provide this document (the Work) under the Creative Commons CC BY-ND
3.0 license available online at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/. The Authors
further grant permission reuse of images and text from the ﬁrst page of the Work, provided

16

Submitted to the Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques

November 9, 2013

Figure 14. Top Left. Stars using broken polylines. Top Right. Spirals using a single continu-
ous polyline. Bottom. Tiger using dashed Bézier paths.

that the reuse is for the purpose of promoting and/or summarizing the Work in scholarly
venues and that any reuse is accompanied by a scientiﬁc citation to the Work.

17

