Ten Simple Rules for Better Figures Nicolas P. Rougier, Michael
Droettboom, Philip E. Bourne

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier, Michael Droettboom, Philip E. Bourne. Ten Simple
Rules for Better Figures. PLoS Computational Biology, 2014, pp.7.
￿10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833￿. ￿hal-01063732￿

HAL Id: hal-01063732

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01063732

Submitted on 12 Sep 2014

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Editorial

Ten Simple Rules for Better Figures

Nicolas P. Rougier1,2,3*, Michael Droettboom4, Philip E. Bourne5

1 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France, 2 LaBRI, UMR 5800 CNRS,
Talence, France, 3 Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases, UMR 5293
CNRS, Bordeaux, France, 4 Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States of America, 5 Office of the Director, The
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America

Scientific visualization is classically the process of graphically
defined as displaying scientific data. However, this process is far from
direct or automatic. There are so many different ways to the same data:
scatter plots, represent linear plots, bar plots, and pie charts, to
name just a few. Furthermore, the same data, using the same type of
plot, may be perceived very differently depending on the figure. A more
who is looking at accurate definition for scientific visualiza- tion
would be a graphical interface between people and data. In this short
article, we do not pretend to explain everything about this interface;
rather, see [1,2] for introductory work. Instead we aim to provide a
basic set of rules to improve figure design and to explain some of the
common pitfalls.

Rule 1: Know Your Audience

intent.

Given the definition above, problems is perceived arise when how a
visual differs significantly from the intent of the conveyer.
Consequently, it is impor- tant to identify, as early as possible in the
design process, the audience and the is to convey. The message the
visual graphical design of the visual should be informed by this If you
are making a figure for yourself and your direct collaborators, you can
possibly skip a number of steps in the design process, because each of
you knows what the figure is about. However, if you intend to publish a
figure in a scientific journal, you should make sure your figure is
correct and conveys all the relevant information to a broader audi-
ence. Student audiences require special care since the goal for that
situation is to explain a concept. In that case, you may have to add
extra information to make sure the concept fully understood. is Finally,
the general public may be the most difficult audience of all since you
need to design a simple, possibly ap- proximated, figure that reveals
only the most research (Figure 1). This has proven to be a difficult
exercise [3].

salient part of your

Rule 2: Identify Your Message

A figure is meant to express an idea or introduce some facts or a result
that would to be too long (or nearly impossible) explain only with
words, be it for an article or during a time-limited oral presentation.
In this context, it is impor- tant the to clearly identify the role of
figure, i.e., what is the underlying message and how can a figure best
express this message? Once clearly identified, this message will be a
strong guide for the design of the figure, as shown in Figure 2. Only
after identifying the message will it be worth the time to develop your
figure, just as you would take the time to craft your words and
sentences when writing an article only after deciding on the main points
of the text. If your figure is able to convey a striking message at
first glance, chances are increased that your article will draw more
attention from the community.

Rule 3: Adapt the Figure to the Support Medium

A figure can be displayed on a variety of media, such as a poster, a
computer monitor, a projection screen (as in an oral presentation), or a
simple sheet of paper (as in a printed article). Each of these media
represents different physical sizes for the figure, but more
importantly, each them also implies different ways of of viewing and
interacting with the figure. For example, during an oral presentation, a
figure will be displayed for a limited time. Thus, the viewer must
quickly understand what is displayed and what it represents while still
listening to your explanation. In such a situation, the figure

in order

the situation is

must be kept simple and the message must to grab be visually salient
attention, as shown in Figure 3. It is also important to keep in mind
that during oral presentations, figures will be video-pro- jected and
will be seen from a distance, and figure elements must consequently be
made thicker (lines) or bigger (points, text), colors should have strong
contrast, and vertical text should be avoided, etc. For a totally
journal article, different, because the reader is able to view the
figure as long as necessary. This means a lot of details can be added,
along with complementary explanations in the caption. If we take into
account the fact that more and more people now read articles on computer
screens, they also have the possibility to zoom and drag the figure.
support Ideally, each type of medium requires a different figure, and
you should abandon the practice of extracting a figure from your article
to be put, as is, in your oral presentation.

Rule 4: Captions Are Not Optional

Whether describing an experimental introducing a new model, or setup,
presenting new results, you cannot explain everything within the figure
itself—a figure should be accompanied by a caption. The caption explains
how to read the figure and provides additional precision for what cannot
be graphically represented. This can be thought of as the explanation
you would give during an oral presentation, or in front of a poster, but
with the difference that you must think in advance about the questions
people would ask. For example, if you have a bar plot, do not expect the

Citation: Rougier NP, Droettboom M, Bourne PE (2014) Ten Simple Rules
for Better Figures. PLoS Comput Biol 10(9): e1003833.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833

Editor: Scott Markel, Accelrys, United States of America

Published September 11, 2014

This is an open-access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely
reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under
the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

Funding: The authors received no specific funding for this article.

Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

* Email: Nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr

PLOS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org

1

September 2014 | Volume 10 |

Issue 9 | e1003833

Figure 1. Know your audience. This is a remake of a figure that was
originally published in the New York Times (NYT) in 2007. This new
figure was made with matplotlib using approximated data. The data is
made of four series (men deaths/cases, women deaths/cases) that could
have been displayed using classical double column (deaths/cases) bar
plots. However, the layout used here is better for the intended
audience. It exploits the fact that the number of new cases is always
greater than the corresponding number of deaths to mix the two values.
It also takes advantage of the reading direction (English
[left-to-right] for NYT) in order to ease comparison between men and
women while the central labels give an immediate access to the main
message of the figure (cancer). This is a self-contained figure that
delivers a clear message on cancer deaths. However, it is not precise.
The chosen layout makes it actually difficult to estimate the number of
kidney cancer deaths because of its bottom position and the location of
the labelled ticks at the top. While this is acceptable for a
general-audience publication, it would not be acceptable in a scientific
publication if actual numerical values were not given elsewhere in the
article. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833.g001

reader to guess the value of the different bars by just looking and
measuring relative heights on the figure. If the numeric values are
important, they must be provided elsewhere in your article or be written
very clearly on the figure. Similarly, if there is a point of interest
in the figure (critical domain, specific point, etc.), make is visually
distinct but do not sure it hesitate to point it out again in the
caption.

Rule 5: Do Not Trust the Defaults

Any plotting library or software comes with a set of default settings.
When the end-user does not specify anything, these default settings are
used to specify size, ticks, markers, etc. font, colors,

styles,

(Figure 4). Virtually any setting can be specified, and you can usually
recognize the specific style of each software package (Matlab, Excel,
Keynote, etc.) or library (LaTeX, matplotlib, gnuplot, etc.) thanks
these default settings. to the choice of Since these settings are to be
used for virtually any type of plot, they are not fine-tuned for a
specific type of plot. In other words, they are good enough for any plot
but they are best for none. All plots require at least some manual
tuning of the different settings to better express the message, be it
for making a precise plot more salient to a broad audience, or the to
choose the best colormap for nature of the data. For example, see [4]
for how to go from the default settings to a nicer visual in the case of
the matplotlib library.

Rule 6: Use Color Effectively

Color is an important dimension in human vision and is consequently
equally important in the design of a scientific figure. However, as
explained by Edward Tufte [1], color can be either your greatest ally or
your worst enemy if not used properly. If you decide to use color, you
should consider which colors to use and where to use them. For example,
to highlight some element of a figure, you can use color this element
while keeping other elements gray or black. This provides an enhancing
effect. How- ever, if you have no such need, you need to ask yourself,
‘‘Is there any reason this plot is blue and not black?’’ If you don’t
know the answer, just keep it black. The same holds true for colormaps.
Do not use the default colormap (e.g., jet or rainbow)

for

PLOS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org

2

September 2014 | Volume 10 |

Issue 9 | e1003833

Figure 2. Identify your message. The superior colliculus (SC) is a
brainstem structure at the crossroads of multiple functional pathways.
Several neurophysiological studies suggest that the population of active
neurons in the SC encodes the location of a visual target that induces
saccadic eye movement. The projection from the retina surface (on the
left) to the collicular surface (on the right) is based on a standard
and quantitative model in which a logarithmic mapping function ensures
the projection from retinal coordinates to collicular coordinates. This
logarithmic mapping plays a major role in saccade decision. To better
illustrate this role, an artificial checkerboard pattern has been used,
even though such a pattern is not used during experiments. This
checkerboard pattern clearly demonstrates the extreme magnification of
the foveal region, which is the main message of the figure.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833.g002

unless there is an explicit reason to do so (see Figure 5 and [5]).
Colormaps are traditionally classified into three main categories: N
Sequential: one variation of a unique color, used for quantitative data
vary- ing from low to high. N Diverging: variation from one color to
another, used to highlight deviation from a median value. N Qualitative:
rapid variation of colors, used mainly for discrete or categorical data.

is

Use the colormap that

the most relevant to your data. Lastly, avoid using too many similar
color blindness may make it difficult to discern some color differences
(see [6] for detailed explanation).

colors

since

Rule 7: Do Not Mislead the Reader

What distinguishes a scientific figure from other graphical artwork is
the presence of data that needs to be shown as objectively as possible.
A scientific figure is, by definition, tied to the data (be it an
experimental setup, a model, or some results) and if you loosen this
tie, you may unintentionally project a different message than intended.
However, repre- senting results objectively is not always
straightforward. For example, a number of implicit choices made by the
library or software you’re using that are meant to be situations may
also accurate in most mislead the viewer under certain circum- stances.
If your software automatically re- scales values, you might obtain an
objec- tive representation of the data (because

labels, and ticks

title, indicate clearly what is actually displayed) that is none-
theless visually misleading (see bar plot in Figure 6); you have
inadvertently misled your readers into visually believing some- thing
that does not exist in your data. You can also make explicit choices
that are wrong by design, such as using pie charts or 3-D charts to
compare quanti- ties. These two kinds of plots are known to induce an
incorrect perception of quantities and it requires some expertise to use
them properly. As a rule of thumb, make sure to always use the simplest
type of plots that can convey your message and make sure to use labels,
ticks, title, and the full range of values when relevant. Lastly, do not
hesitate to ask colleagues about their interpretation of your figures.

PLOS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org

3

September 2014 | Volume 10 |

Issue 9 | e1003833

dy dt

~(1=4z(x{y))(1{x), x§0,

Figure 3. Adapt the figure to the support medium. These two figures
represent the same simulation of the trajectories of a dual-particle
system dx ~(1=4z(y{x))(1{y), y§0) where each particle interacts with the
other. Depending on the initial conditions, the ( dt system may end up
in three different states. The left figure has been prepared for a
journal article where the reader is free to look at every detail. The
red color has been used consistently to indicate both initial conditions
(red dots in the zoomed panel) and trajectories (red lines). Line
transparency has been increased in order to highlight regions where
trajectories overlap (high color density). The right figure has been
prepared for an oral presentation. Many details have been removed
(reduced number of trajectories, no overlapping trajectories, reduced
number of ticks, bigger axis and tick labels, no title, thicker lines)
because the time-limited display of this figure would not allow for the
audience to scrutinize every detail. Furthermore, since the figure will
be described during the oral presentation, some parts have been modified
to make them easier to reference (e.g., the yellow box, the red dashed
line). doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833.g003

Rule 8: Avoid ‘‘Chartjunk’’

Chartjunk refers to all the unnecessary or confusing visual elements
found in a figure that do not improve the message (in the best case) or
add confusion (in the worst case). For example, chartjunk may include
the use of too many colors, too

many labels, gratuitously colored back- (see left grounds, useless grid
lines, etc. part of Figure 7). The term was first coined by Edward Tutfe
in [1], in which he argues that any decorations that do not tell the
viewer something new must be banned: ‘‘Regardless of the cause, it is
all non-data-ink or redundant data-ink, and it

is often chartjunk.’’ Thus, in order to try to save ink, or avoid
chartjunk, electrons in the computing era. Stephen Few reminds us in [7]
that graphs should ideally ‘‘represent all is needed to see and
understand what’s meaningful.’’ However, an element that could be
considered chartjunk in one

the data that

Figure 4. Do not trust the defaults. The left panel shows the sine and
cosine functions as rendered by matplotlib using default settings. While
this figure is clear enough, it can be visually improved by tweaking the
various available settings, as shown on the right panel.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833.g004

PLOS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org

4

September 2014 | Volume 10 |

Issue 9 | e1003833

Figure 5. Use color effectively. This figure represents the same
signal, whose frequency increases to the right and intensity increases
towards the bottom, using three different colormaps. The rainbow
colormap (qualitative) and the seismic colormap (diverging) are equally
bad for such a signal because they tend to hide details in the high
frequency domain (bottom-right part). Using a sequential colormap such
as the purple one, it is easier to see details in the high frequency
domain. Adapted from [5]. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833.g005

figure can be justified in another. For example, the use of a background
color in a regular plot is generally a bad idea because it does not
bring useful informa- tion. However, in the right part of Figure 7, we
use a gray background box to indicate the range [21,+1] as described in
the caption. If you’re in doubt, do not hesitate to consult the
excellent blog of Kaiser Fung [8], which explains quite clearly the
concept of chartjunk through the study of many examples.

Rule 9: Message Trumps Beauty

Figures have been used in scientific literature since antiquity. Over
the years, a lot of progress has been made, and each scientific domain
has developed its own set of best practices. It is important to know
these standards, because they facilitate a more direct comparison
between models, studies, or experiments. More importantly, they can help
you to spot obvious errors in your results. However, most of the time,

you may need to design a brand-new figure, because there is no standard
way of describing your research. In such a case, browsing the scientific
literature is a good starting point. If some article displays a stunning
figure to introduce results similar to yours, you might want to try to
adapt the figure for your own needs (note that we did not say copy; be
careful with image copyright). If you turn to the web, you have to be
very careful, because the frontiers between data visualization, info-

Figure 6. Do not mislead the reader. On the left part of the figure, we
represented a series of four values: 30, 20, 15, 10. On the upper left
part, we used the disc area to represent the value, while in the bottom
part we used the disc radius. Results are visually very different. In
the latter case (red circles), the last value (10) appears very small
compared to the first one (30), while the ratio between the two values
is only 3:1. This situation is actually very frequent in the literature
because the command (or interface) used to produce circles or scatter
plots (with varying point sizes) offers to use the radius as default to
specify the disc size. It thus appears logical to use the value for the
radius, but this is misleading. On the right part of the figure, we
display a series of ten values using the full range for values on the
top part (y axis goes from 0 to 100) or a partial range in the bottom
part (y axis goes from 80 to 100), and we explicitly did not label the
y-axis to enhance the confusion. The visual perception of the two series
is totally different. In the top part (black series), we tend to
interpret the values as very similar, while in the bottom part, we tend
to believe there are significant differences. Even if we had used labels
to indicate the actual range, the effect would persist because the bars
are the most salient information on these figures.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833.g006

PLOS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org

5

September 2014 | Volume 10 |

Issue 9 | e1003833

Figure 7. Avoid chartjunk. We have seven series of samples that are
equally important, and we would like to show them all in order to
visually compare them (exact signal values are supposed to be given
elsewhere). The left figure demonstrates what is certainly one of the
worst possible designs. All the curves cover each other and the
different colors (that have been badly and automatically chosen by the
software) do not help to distinguish them. The legend box overlaps part
of the graphic, making it impossible to check if there is any
interesting information in this area. There are far too many ticks: x
labels overlap each other, making them unreadable, and the three-digit
precision does not seem to carry any significant information. Finally,
the grid does not help because (among other criticisms) it is not
aligned with the signal, which can be considered discrete given the
small number of sample points. The right figure adopts a radically
different layout while using the same area on the sheet of paper. Series
have been split into seven plots, each of them showing one series, while
other series are drawn very lightly behind the main one. Series labels
have been put on the left of each plot, avoiding the use of colors and a
legend box. The number of x ticks has been reduced to three, and a thin
line indicates these three values for all plots. Finally, y ticks have
been completely removed and the height of the gray background boxes
indicate the [21,+1] range (this should also be indicated in the figure
caption if it were to be used in an article).
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833.g007

Figure 8. Message trumps beauty. This figure is an extreme case where
the message is particularly clear even if the aesthetic of the figure is
questionable. The uncanny valley is a well-known hypothesis in the field
of robotics that correlates our comfort level with the human-likeness of
a robot. To express this hypothetical nature, hypothetical data were
used (y~x2{5e{5(x{2)2 ) and the figure was given a sketched look (xkcd
filter on matplotlib) associated with a cartoonish font that enhances
the overall effect. Tick labels were also removed since only the overall
shape of the curve matters. Using a sketch style conveys to the viewer
that the data is approximate, and that it is the higher-level concepts
rather than low-level details that are important [10].
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833.g008

PLOS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org

6

September 2014 | Volume 10 |

Issue 9 | e1003833

graphics, design, and art are becoming thinner and thinner [9]. There
exists a in which myriad of online graphics aesthetic is the first
criterion and content comes in second place. Even if a lot of those
graphics might be considered beau- tiful, most of them do not fit the
scientific framework. Remember, in science, mes- sage and readability of
the figure is the most important aspect while beauty is only an option,
as dramatically shown in Figure 8.

Rule 10: Get the Right Tool

is

It

important

There exist many tools that can make your life easier when creating
figures, and knowing a few of them can save you a lot of time. Depending
on the type of visual you’re trying to create, there is generally a
dedicated tool that will do what you’re to trying to achieve. understand
at this point that the software or library you’re using to make a
visual- ization can be different from the software or library you’re
using to conduct your research and/or analyze your data. You can always
export data in order to use it in another tool. Whether drawing a graph,
designing a schema of your experiment, or plotting some data, there are
open-source tools for you. They’re just waiting to be found and used.
Below is a small list of open-source tools.

Matplotlib is a python plotting library, primarily for 2-D plotting, but
with some

References

and interactive

3-D support, which produces publication- quality figures in a variety of
hardcopy formats environments across platforms. It comes with a huge
gallery of examples that cover virtually all scientific domains
(http://matplotlib.org/ gallery.html).

R is a language and environment for statistical computing and graphics.
R provides a wide variety of statistical (linear and nonlinear modeling,
classical statisti- cal tests, time-series analysis, classification,
clustering, etc.) and graphical techniques, and is highly extensible.

Inkscape is a professional vector graphics editor. It allows you to
design for complex figures and can be used, example, to improve a
script-generated figure or to read a PDF file in order to extract
figures and transform them any way you like.

TikZ and PGF are TeX packages for creating graphics programmatically.
TikZ is built on top of PGF and allows you to create sophisticated
graphics in a rather intuitive and easy manner, as shown by the Tikz
gallery (http://www.texample. net/tikz/examples/all/).

GIMP is the GNU Image Manipula- tion Program. It is an application for
such tasks as photo retouching, image compo- sition, and image
authoring. If you need to quickly retouch an image or add some legends
or labels, GIMP is the perfect tool.

ImageMagick is a software suite to create, edit, compose, or convert
bitmap images from the command line. It can be used to quickly convert
an image into another format, and the huge script gallery
(http://www.fmwconcepts.com/imagema gick/index.php) by Fred Weinhaus
will provide virtually any effect you might want to achieve.

D3.js (or just D3 for Data-Driven Documents) is a JavaScript library
that offers an easy way to create and control interactive data-based
graphical forms which run in web browsers, as shown in the
http://github.com/ mbostock/d3/wiki/Gallery.

gallery

at

Cytoscape is a software platform for visualizing complex networks and
integrat- ing these with any type of attribute data. If your data or
results are very complex, cytoscape may help you alleviate this
complexity.

Circos was originally designed for visualizing genomic data but can
create figures from data in any field. Circos is if you have data that
describes useful relationships or multilayered annotations of one or
more scales.

Notes

All

the figures

for this article were produced using matplotlib, and figure scripts are
available from https://github. com/rougier/ten-rules.

1.  Tufte EG (1983) The Visual Display of Quanti- tative Information.
    Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press.

2.  Doumont JL (2009) Trees, maps, and theorems.

Brussels: Principiae.

3.  Kosara R, Mackinlay J (2013) Storytelling: The next step for
    visualization. IEEE Comput 46: 44–

4.  

5.  Rougier NP (2012) Scientific visualization and matplotlib tutorial.
    Euroscipy 2012 & 2013. Available: http://www.loria.fr/,rougier/
    teaching/matplotlib/matplotlib.html. Accessed 12 August 2014.

6.  Borland D, Taylor RM (2007) Rainbow color map (still) considered
    harmful. IEEE Comput Graph Appl 27: 14–17.

7.  Okabe M, Ito K (2008). Color universal design (cud) - how to make
    figures and presentations that are friendly to colorblind people.
    Available: http://jfly. iam.u-tokyo.ac.jp/color/. Accessed 12
    August 2014.

8.  Few S (2011) The chartjunk debate, a close examination of recent
    findings. Visual Business Intelligence Newsletter. Available:
    http://www. perceptualedge.com/articles/visual_business_
    intelligence/the_chartjunk_debate.pdf. Accessed 12 August 2014.

9.  Fung K (2005). Junk charts: Recycling chartjunk as junk art.
    Available: http://junkcharts.typepad. com. Accessed 12 August 2014.

10. Borkin MA, Vo AA, Bylinskii Z,

Isola P, Sunkavalli S, et al. (2013) What makes a visualization
memorable? IEEE Trans Vis Com- put Graph 19: 2306–2315.

10. Schumann J, Strothotte T, Raab A, Laser S (1996) Assessing the
    effect of non-photorealistic rendered images in cad. In: Proceedings
    of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems;
    13–18 April 1996; New York, New York, United States. CHI 96. New
    York: Association for Computing Machinery. pp.35–41.

PLOS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org

7

September 2014 | Volume 10 |

Issue 9 | e1003833


