From CreaCube to EscapeCube: trying to add internal
sensors to collect data automatically
Axel Palaude, Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Axel Palaude, Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard, Thierry Viéville. From CreaCube to EscapeCube:
[Technical Report] RT-0517, Inria &
trying to add internal sensors to collect data automatically.
Labri, Université de Bordeaux. 2022, pp.18. ￿hal-03687237v2￿

HAL Id: hal-03687237

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03687237v2

Submitted on 31 Aug 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution - ShareAlike 4.0 International License

From CreaCube to EscapeCube: trying to add internal sensors to collect data
automatically

3
Axel Palaude , Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard , Thierry Viéville
MNEMOSYNE

1

2

Technical Report N°0517 — May 2022 —18 pages.

Abstract: CreaCube is a problem solving activity requiring both computational thinking and creative
problem-solving, in which the subject tries to assemble four cubes into one structure with a speciﬁc
performance. We made the assumption that device-related observables such as cubes position evolution
in space may be used to automatically determine subject-related observables which can then be
interpreted in relation to certain behaviors or emotions. This article details the design of new material for
the CreaCube activity in order to create a new set of modular robotic cubes. This paper describes the
analysis developed, step-by-step, and what pitfalls and failures we faced during the analysis of the
requirements for developing new modular cubes. The goal of developing a new set of robotic cubes aims
to facilitate automatic data collection but also to ensure a large diﬀusion of the task to collect more data
automatically. First, the analysis of existing Human Robot Interactions (HRI) within the CreaCube task is
developed through UML charts based on the instructions of the task and the anticipation of the HRI.
Second, we discussed the physical elements of the new set of cubes, aiming at an easy open-source
manufacturing for anyone interested in activities for the development of computational thinking. Third,
we implemented a conditional statement algorithm trying to automatically collect device-related
observables despite an unknown set of unpredicted but possible behaviors.

Key-words: creative problem-solving, learning analytics, educational robotics, data collection

1 Axel Palaude, Inria Mnemosyne Team, AIdE – axel.palaude@inria.fr

2Lucie Bannay, ENSC Bordeaux; Baptiste Bernard, ENSEIRB-MATMECA Bordeaux

3 Thierry Viéville, Inria Mnemosyne Team, UCA LINE Laboratory, thierry.vieville@inria.fr

De CreaCube à EscapeCube : une tentative d’ajout de capteurs internes pour permettre
une collecte de données automatique

Résumé : CreaCube est une activité de résolution de problème qui requiert à la fois un recours à la pensée
informatique et à la résolution de problème créatif, lors de laquelle le sujet doit assembler quatre cubes en
une seule structure avec une propriété de mouvement. Nous avons fait l’hypothèse que les observables
relatifs à l’état du support physique comme l’évolution de la position des cubes dans l’espace pourraient être
utilisés pour déterminer automatiquement les observables relatifs au sujet comme les comportements ou les
émotions. Ce rapport détaille le développement d’une nouvelle version de CreaCube. Il décrit pas à pas les
étapes mises en place pour ce développement, en détaillant les diﬀérents obstacles qui se sont posés durant
celui-ci. L’objectif est de développer un nouvel ensemble de cubes robotiques permettant de faciliter la
collecte automatique des données. L’analyse de l’interaction homme-machine (IHM) de la tâche CreaCube est
développée à travers des schémas UML basés sur les instructions de la tâche et l’anticipation de l’IHM. Ensuite,
nous discutons des éléments physiques de nouveaux cubes, en visant une production facile et open-source
pour un accès facilité pour une large diﬀusion de la tâche pour quiconque est intéressé dans le
développement de la pensée informatique. Enﬁn, nous implémentons un algorithme conditionnel aﬁn de
déduire les observables relatifs au support à partir des données collectées par les nouveaux cubes, malgré un
ensemble de conditions non exhaustif.

Mots clés : résolution créative de problème, analyse de l’apprentissage, robotique éducative, collecte de
données

From CreaCube to EscapeCube : trying to add internal sensors to collect data automatically 5

Description of the project

1.1. Context and framework
1.2. Basic requirements

Conception of EscapeCube

2.1. Modeling of the new cubes set
2.2. Practical cases and discussion about physical components
2.3. Data processing using conditional statements: from raw data to task observables

Conclusion

Bibliography

6
6
7

8
8
10
13

15

16

RT N° 0517

6

Axel Palaude, Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard, Thierry Viéville

1. Description of the project

1.1. Context and framework

The CreaCube task engages a participant in an ill-defined problem solving activity with four different cubelets (red,
white, blue and black) presented on a table (with a black point and a red point on it) to a player. The instructions,
repeatable at will, consist in one sentence : « build a vehicle made up of four pieces that moves by itself from the
red point to the black point ». The setup of the activity is shown in Figure 1. The black cube has a face with
sensors, the blue cube has a switch on a face to activate a battery and the white cube has wheels on a face that
need to be alimented and receive instructions from sensors to move at a certain speed.

Figure 1 : A configuration of the CreaCube activity

We can use the CreaCube activity in order to study some transversal competencies, also known as 21st-century
skills , including problem solving, collaboration, creativity and computational thinking (Romero et al., 2017). The
data collection of CreaCube experiments consists of sets of observables, and a set of observables represents the
state of the activity at a given time. In this context, an observable represents a specific element of the scene : the
actual configuration of the cubes or the player’s behavior. Observables require a decision based on direct analysis
of the situation or indirect one (through video analysis) or other data such as learning analytics provided by the
modular cubes can inform these observables.
In this article, we will use the observable framework that was developed in (Palaude et al., 2022). This framework
consists of two categories :

-Device-related observables : Observables that are related to the physical manipulation of the activity. It
contains mainly observables about the configuration of the cubes (what cubes are connected, what cubes are in
hand, etc.). These observables can be considered as modular robotic learning analytics at specific moments or
data streams if they are generated within a certain time frame with a certain regularity to inform about the
longitudinal CPS process during the task;

-Subject-related observables : Observables that are not related directly to the physical manipulation of the
activity. It contains mainly observables about the player’s internal state (behavior, emotions, what did the player
see etc.).
The main assumption behind this classification is that subject-related observables may be deduced by the analysis
of the evolution of device-related observables. As device-related observables are not subject to interpretation (a

Inria

From CreaCube to EscapeCube : trying to add internal sensors to collect data automatically 7

cube is in hand at a given time or not), this assumption implies that we may be able to collect subject-related
observables without the bias of an external human observer.
This research report summarizes the design and conception of a new physical version of CreaCube taking into
account the new set of observables detailed in (Palaude et al., 2022).

1.2. Basic requirements

Our main goal is the data collection of observables from the CreaCube activity with non-intrusive sensors, with a
setup that is transportable, autonomous, cheap and easily reproducible. This goal may be decomposed into three
main issues: (1) learning analytics from each modular robotic cube; (2) transportability and autonomy; (3)
Reproducibility and price.

1. Learning analytics from each modular robotic cube. Through these observables we aim to analyze the
CreaCube activity through non-intrusive sensors. We make the following assumption : If we want to collect
relevant data, we need to create an activity that is the same from a subject’s point of view.
One possibility is to integrate the sensors inside the new version of the cubelet, which induces a modification of
their size, which has been considered as acceptable by the learning science colleagues.
Beyond, for instance, adding a fifth cube devoted to the collection of data is not conceivable, because its presence
in the activity would add an element that the subject can take into account during the experiment.
As such, we call intrusive sensors the physical elements devoted to the data collection that may influence the
subject’s behavior during the manipulation.

We point out that the original CreaCube activity already has what we could call an intrusive sensor. A camera
pointed at the hands of the subjects (and the cubes) records the activity to allow a manual (or automatic) detection
of observables.
is included within the original CreaCube activity
organization, but as it is not considered as an existing element during data evaluation, we will try to pass on it.

is not an intrusive sensor because it

It

Given these elements, it seems that it will be necessary to change internal components of the cubes, the table with
the black and red points or the instructions device in order to achieve the data collection.

2. Transportability and autonomy. Since we want to collect enough data to perform relevant statistics without
hundreds of hours of manual analysis of video, we want to be able to easily set up an automatic experiment,
leading to two different constraints : transportability and autonomy.

The transportability indicates that the setup may be used in different environments where the experiment may take
place : during scientific events, in libraries or schools etc. As such, the setup should not be too fragile, sensible to
external conditions like humidity and not too cumbersome. We will take the original cubes from CreaCube as a
reference for resistance as they are already resistant to most of the factors we will describe later. They are also not
cumbersome, easily stored in a handbox. Our final product will comply with such requirements, in addition to the
fact that a drastic change in physical form of the activity may contradict our previous statement about intrusivity to
the activity.

The autonomy indicates that the setup should be able to collect data without the presence of a specialized
observer. This overlaps with the next point, as autonomy in data collection is key to allow people not specialized in
the CreaCube activity to reproduce it without an extended knowledge of its data collection. In other words, third
party partners should easily perform the experiment in an unbiased way.

3. Reproducibility and price. Another consequence of our general objective is the fact that we want the activity to
be easily reproducible. As the activity tackles computational thinking and creativity we think the activity could be
adapted by teachers, educators, etc. The idea is to achieve a win-win situation, where the activity itself is used for
those who want to do it, and data can be collected to be analyzed afterwards if people want to, thus creating a
case of participatory science.
However, this idea requires making a project that is open (with potential models, 3d-printable tools etc.) and as
cheap as possible.

RT N° 0517

8

Axel Palaude, Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard, Thierry Viéville

The CreaCube activity itself, on a minimal setup (instructions printed on paper and no red or black points), only
requires the four cubes from the Cubelet robotic cube kit, which are sold for about 40 euros each. Thus, our
budget should not exceed 150 to 160 euros. Our cubes will not include some functionalities of cubelets that are
not necessary for the activity, but additional sensors may increase the price.

To sum up, we want the new activity to remain the same from the subject’s perception. As such, we needed to
consider non intrusive sensors. However, as an assumed goal is to easily spread the activity outside laboratory
experimental situations, we also needed to consider constraints of transportability, autonomy, reproducibility and
price, constraints that do not apply for set laboratory experiments controlled by experimenters.

With all
EscapeCube (as an escape game shop was a potential target for a spreading of the activity).

these points in mind, we will now detail the steps of the conception of the project, that we called

2. Conception of EscapeCube

The conception of the project consists of three steps : modeling the new activity with the constraints previously
detailed, choosing the physical components for the setup and its assembly and programming the autonomous
collection of data.

2.1. Modeling of the new cubes set

While in use, the EscapeCube activity has two main actors. First and foremost, the subject of the activity, the
player, manipulates the cubes to achieve the goal given by the instructions. Second, the experimenter is interested
in data about the activity. Figure 2 is the use-case diagram of the project following the Unified Modeling Language
(UML) standard, that was used for the duration of this part of the conception.

Figure 2 : UML Use-case diagram of EscapeCube

These two actors do not necessarily interact with each other, and thus actions are not necessarily linked together :

Inria

From CreaCube to EscapeCube : trying to add internal sensors to collect data automatically 9

-The player does the CreaCube activity. As the cubes are freely manipulated, they require robustness

for cubes manipulation (transportability) and autonomy from the battery.

-The experimenter is interested in the Data collection of the activity. This collection requires a Data
recording setup. We made the distinction between individual data and group data because we are interested in
data from only one subject at a time, but the activity may be played by groups, leading to different data that we
must be aware of (in order not to include them in the analysis of one-person manipulations). The experimenter is
the actor interested in the data collection, and it will require an external computer to retrieve it to guarantee the
autonomy of the cubes, either by a wireless connection (bluetooth, wi-fi) or by a plug connected to the cubes when
they are not manipulated. We also consider that the experimenter needs to take care of the Maintenance of the
cubes (mainly moving out data and charging the battery), but it could be done by an external actor (e.g. a teacher
presenting the activity to the class).

It appears that a third actor, the facilitator, could have been added, taking up the role of the maintenance of the
activity material for instance, but also the preparation of the activity (disposition of the cubes, general explanations
before the start of the activity), but its role may overlap with the experimenter’s. It could be a teacher, an animator
etc. The facilitator is not necessarily interested in data collection, but rather in the playful side of the activity for
instance. We will consider different scenarios in the next section where we will consider a facilitator.

We will consider now a situation of what we think will be a typical sequence of the EscapeCube activity,
represented in Figure 3.

Figure 3 : UMLSequence diagram of the activity representing the timeline of interactions.

RT N° 0517

10

Axel Palaude, Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard, Thierry Viéville

The subject needs to listen to the instructions, and the first listening is situated at the beginning of the activity. It
implies that the data collection must begin when these instructions are played for the first time. As the player may
quit without succeeding in the activity, we cannot consider an automatic ending to the activity without considering
either a time limit (or inactivity time limit) or a stop button. As the stop button is more flexible and representative
than a time limit because it accounts for the desire of the subject to stop the activity, we considered a stop button.
The announcement of the end of the experiment is indicative to allow the activity to be done again, thus preventing
a player change in the middle of the activity.

While creating the sequence diagram, we noticed that the activity instructions are given by a device external to the
cubes, and thus put a start and a stop button there. In the original CreaCube activity, it is not a clear element, as it
may be a piece of paper with instructions written on it, or a recorder with a listenable record of the instructions. As
it is not a defined element, we did not consider the device as a part of the unchangeable CreaCube activity (in the
late version of the activity, the most frequent device is an external listenable record of the instructions). The same
goes for the surface where the cubes are placed. As such, it appears that those elements may be pivotal to the
transformation of CreaCube into EscapeCube, as well as the internal structural organization of the cube (which
can be modified freely).
However, it also implies that the CreaCube activity already has blurry elements in it that could change the behavior
of the cube depending on which one is chosen. Maybe a recorder may be analyzed as a potential part of a solution
from the subject’s perspective, whether a simple piece of paper may not. As such, we could question the
relevance of our first and main point justifying the creation of a new version of the activity.

With these two diagrams, we saw that a general comment about the activity is that it may be used in a wide variety
of situations, and that these situations may have an impact on how the cubes should work. In order to go a step
further and discuss the physical implementation, we will now present different practical cases for the project and
what they imply for the cubes.

2.2. Practical cases and discussion about physical components

We consider three different “typical” experimental situations in which the EscapeCube project and cubes could
take place. These situations were created to discuss design constraints by covering a large panel of possible
situations with typical predictable constraints. Our 3 situations are the following :

-
-
-

An experimental situation similar to already existing data situations.
An educational and playful situation in a place like a classroom or a media library.
A fully playful situation in a place like an escape game.

a. Research lab experimental situation

In this situation, the subject is confronted with the activity in a controlled environment which is situated in a
research laboratory.
Before the activity, the experimenter prepares the cubes original disposition beforehand, and gives only necessary
information required by the experimental protocol.
During the activity, the subject is alone, and so the data collection corresponds fully to actions taken by the one
subject of the activity, as no external noise (like advice from other people) will change the subject’s behavior.
Given the situation and the actual experimental protocol, the subject is fully aware of the measures. Furthermore,
as the subject is doing the activity in a laboratory, there is an awareness of the scientific and educational purpose,
in addition to the playful feature of the activity.
After the activity, the experimenter can gather data about the experiment and prepare the activity for another
subject.

This situation is the control situation. It corresponds to the activity with minimum noise and constraints, as the
experimenter and the environment can be adapted to fit a new version of the cubes.

Inria

From CreaCube to EscapeCube : trying to add internal sensors to collect data automatically 11

This experimental condition is the one requiring the least constraints for the experimental material. A prototype that
is not usable in this control situation has no chance to be developed fully.

b.

“Media center” situation

In this situation, the subject is confronted with the activity in an uncontrolled environment like a library.
Before the activity, the facilitator-experimenter prepares the cubes original disposition beforehand, and gives only
necessary information required by the experimental protocol.
During the activity, the subject is alone. However, there can be a potential noise in this public environment, and
elements from the environment (bookshelves, pen, paper etc.) may influence the subject’s way of thinking.
Moreover, the subject may already have seen or heard cues about the activity before being confronted with it
(during someone else’s take on the activity for instance). As such, the subject’s potential behavior may be
influenced.
Given the situation and with the presence of the facilitator-experimenter, the subject is aware of the measurement
beforehand. As the subject may not be present specifically for the activity (school trip for instance), the playful
nature of
the activity may be more important than scientific and educational purposes, unlike in the control
situation.
After the activity, the experimenter-facilitator may gather data about the experiment and prepare the activity for
another subject.

This situation is less controlled than the previous situation. The main purpose behind the organization of the
activity is the educational and scientific purpose behind the activity. The potential variations in the environment
(depending on where the activity takes place, which time of the day it is) may influence the behaviors and slightly
modify data. This situation may correspond to the activity done in class, with potential noise, external elements
and potential cues obtained beforehand by other subjects of the activity.

c. Uncontrolled experimental situation

In this activity, the subject is confronted with the activity in an uncontrolled environment, which is a game center
like an escape game or an outreach activity.
As there is no experimenter nor facilitator, the subjects are entirely dependent on EscapeCube specific elements
like listenable instructions and on previous subjects to have the correct original disposition.
During the experiment, the subject is not alone. As the place is a place for groups to come, the subject may be
influenced by other group members during the manipulation, either because they may participate during the
subject’s activity or because other group members are previous subjects that the subject may have seen doing the
experiment.
This comes in addition to the potential noise to the experiment (by the form of sound noise or visual noise like
elements from other activities, games etc.). As such, the subject’s behavior is likely to be influenced by a lot of
external factors.
Given the situation, the subject may not be aware of the measurements beforehand, and this is one role of the
EscapeCube set to make the subject aware of it. Furthermore, this activity may be a distraction for subjects waiting
for other things to do in the place, so the playful nature is the most important one of the EscapeCube set for
subjects of this situation.
The data is gathered at given moments by a researcher, for instance after the center is closed. As such, the
researcher cannot be considered as a potential facilitator.

This situation assumes real autonomy of the EscapeCube set because it cannot suppose the existence of a
facilitator to make sure that the data is properly collected. The design of EscapeCube must take into account a lot
of elements : possible biases given by the presence of a group, a way to make the subject aware of the
measurement (the scientific outreach of the activity) and a way to help players to put the elements back in order
for the next subjects. The set should also be able to detect when the manipulation of a player is not eligible data
(when, for instance, cubes are already assembled before the beginning of the activity).

d.

Implications and propositions for the activity

RT N° 0517

12

Axel Palaude, Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard, Thierry Viéville

We identify three key elements of the situations :

-

-

-

Installation: in the first two situations, a facilitator may be present to install the activity and in particular the
cubes in the correct initial way. However, the absence of the facilitator in the “game center” situation
implies that the setup should include a way to have the activity prepared for a subject. Our proposition is
that the setup should include a way to help players to put the elements back in order for the next subjects,
with for instance detailed instructions to put the cubes in place. The instructions could be vocal or written.
Moreover, subjects should not be able to see the cubes before the start of the activity. To this end, we
propose a box containing the cubes, opened at the start of the activity.
Finally, as we will see in the next subsection, the cubes need to have autonomous batteries. We can
imagine that the initial positions in the box may be used as plugs to recharge the cubes while the device is
not used.
Distraction: Depending on the situation, subjects may be influenced by external distractions such as other
people. However, setting apart a vocal or written encouragement to focus, we cannot assure that the
subject is fully involved in the activity. We may be able to detect the physical intervention of other people
sometimes, but as we do not record the voice of the subject, we cannot detect tips or remarks given by
other people .4
Scientific engagement: The scientific purpose behind the activity may not necessarily be clear. In the first
two situations, the facilitator can help the scientific purpose to be perceived by the subject. Without the
facilitator, once again, a written or oral informative speech can be added to the setup. The implication of
the subject of the experimentation with respect to both the science outreach objective (i.e., computational
thinking initiation) and the learning science objective (i.e., better understand how we solve a creative
ill-posed problem, in order to contribute to meta learning issues, that is better learn how to learn), are
discussed in, e.g., (Barnabé et al., 2020).

Figure 4 : Schema of the activity box that contains the cubes for the activity.

4 This project focuses on single-subject activities, so any cue of another person’s presence (except the facilitator) is
prohibited.

Inria

From CreaCube to EscapeCube : trying to add internal sensors to collect data automatically 13

To sum up, the general idea for the activity; represented in Figure 4, is a box containing the cubes and a voice
transmitter. The box is used as a battery charger and to hide the cubes from a new subject.
The voice transmitter has three records. The first one contains instructions for installation, information about the
scientific purpose of the experiment and general encouragement to do the activity alone. The second one gives
the instructions relative to the activity, and the third one gives instructions to prepare the cubes for the next
subject. The voice transmitter may be replaced by written instructions.
We could have considered another element like a connected table with devices to measure the distance from the
cube during the activity. However, we did not consider it here because of the transportability constraint.
We will now discuss the physical components of the cubes in order to discuss the estimated budget required for
EscapeCube.

e. Physical components of cubes

In order to determine the price of a cube, we need to determine its specifications. We will consider each cube as
identical to the red cube (the only cube without supplementary components like wheels or a switch) for the sake of
the estimation.

First, we cannot add new elements to the activity because it would change the perception of the subjects. Hence,
elements like the bluetooth hat of the original cubelets are not usable.
Every sensor should be situated inside the cube, or be invisible for the subject if placed outside.
Among observables we need to determine with this data collection, we need to determine if a cube is in hand
and/or connected to other cubes. Other device-related observables depend on each cube’s specifications. We
think that we will be able to determine these observables thanks to the spatial position of each cube and how
these positions change over time. We will present a conditional statement algorithm for this sake in the next
section.
These sensors imply different physical elements to add to the cubes :

-

-
-

-

An internal battery for each cube (as sensors must be able to work even when disconnected to the
others);
Sensors allowing to determine the position over time (accelerometer for instance);
Sensors allowing to determine for each face if it is connected to another cube or not (contact sensors for
instance);
A microcontroller connected to sensors to gather data (allowing to connect other sensors relative to
cubes’ specificities).

In addition to the price of an individual cube, we need to take into account the other elements like the general
device box allowing the portability of the activity discussed in the previous section, or specific sensors like the one
allowing to check the evolution of the switch of the blue button over time. That said, it appears that the price of this
new device will be too expensive for the budget we fixed. For the sake of the activity only, it will be more
interesting to buy the original cubelets for the “game center” situation for instance.
However, we will go on the development of the activity as a more expensive budget is not necessarily an abandon
point for research. For instance, this activity may still be used in the “research lab” situation. We will now detail the
data exploitation process to determine device-related observables.

2.3. Data processing using conditional statements:
observables

from raw data to task

Our goal is to determine device-related task observables. In the previous section, we discussed potential physical
constraints. In this section, we will present device-related task observables, and conditional statements allowing us
to convert collected data into these observables.

a. Device-related observables

In this section, we detail device-related observables. We consider five different
structures, partial structures, state of the switch, handling of a cube and user manipulations.

types of observables: final

RT N° 0517

14

Axel Palaude, Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard, Thierry Viéville

The state of the switch can be directly obtained by a sensor inside the blue cube with the switch. We can get the
evolution of the switch over time this way.
Partial and final structures (cubes configurations) correspond mainly to the evolution of the connections between
cubes. As we are able to determine the evolution of the connected face over time, we are able to easily
reconstruct these structures over time.

Handled cubes correspond to the evolution of the cubes’ status. One cube can either be in hand or not in hand. As
we didn’t consider pressure sensors on the cubes because the technology is too expensive, we need to deduce it
from the evolution of the position over time.
User manipulations correspond to general manipulations done by the subject during the activity. It includes the
number of cubes the subject has in hand, and when the subject is listening to the instructions for the first time or
once again. The first ones are immediately given by the number of cubes with the “handled” status, and the
second ones may be detected within the voice transmitter.

Within these observables, handled observables seem to be the ones that require data exploitation. In the next
section, we present one possible algorithm of handling detection.

b. Conditional statements

The algorithm presented here is able to determine which cubes are in hand or not over time, given the evolution
over time of the connections between the cubes and the spatial position of the cubes over time.
We will consider three coordinates : two for the position over the table’s plan and one for the altitude.
The first naïve idea is to consider that every cube that is not on the spatial positions corresponding to the table is
fails when considering that cubes can be stacked. This algorithm introduces a set of
in hand. However,
conditional statements to distinguish situations in which the cubes may be in hand from those in which they may
not:

it

Over limit height. If the cube is higher than four cubes, it is considered in hand.
This case makes sure that a cube is necessarily in hand if its altitude is more than the theoretical maximum height
for non-handled cubes. This theoretical maximum corresponds to the 4 cubes stacked on top of each other, thus
equal to the height of the four cubes.

Increasing altitude. If the cube’s altitude is increasing, the cube is considered in hand.
A cube cannot go up without a helping hand. Thus, if the cube’s altitude is increasing in comparison to its previous
position, then it is in hand.

If

the cube’s altitude is at the minimum level and does not register any movement, it is

Immobile cubes.
considered not in hand.
This case corresponds to the naive one. If the cube is on the table and is immobile, it is not in hand. However, we
cannot only specify a constant altitude, as the subject may be moving the cubes on the experimental hand, without
raising them.

Constant movement. If the cube has a constant altitude and moves constantly for few samples, the cube is
considered not in hand
This case takes into account autonomous structures such as the final one that are moving autonomously. As they
need to be stable in order to not fall off, if the altitude is constant despite the movement of other coordinates, the
cube may be moving autonomously. If this movement is constant within the previous samples (depending on the
sample rate), then it is not moved by the subject.

Inria

From CreaCube to EscapeCube : trying to add internal sensors to collect data automatically 15

Propagation of immobility If two cubes are connected and one of these cubes is considered "not in hand" after
the propagation phase, both are considered "not in hand".
This case allows us to take into account immobile cubes stacked on top of other ones. The propagation of
immobility allows to let immobile objects to remain not in hand and cubes added to a structure by the subject to be
not in hand anymore.

This algorithm was tested on different test and sample data . We decided to use this kind of algorithm because we
did not have access to training data for machine learning algorithms for instance. However, we cannot affirm that
this algorithm is precise enough, as some specific situations may be incorrect with this algorithm. We will now
discuss the limits of this algorithm by, among other, looking at these specific situations.

5

c. Discussion

The previous algorithm is able to determine whether a cube is in hand or not depending on the position of each
cube. For this, it considers a finite number of events like when the cubes are moving autonomously or when they
are handled. However,
this technique is limited because of the nature of the CreaCube experiment. As an
ill-defined problem, the subject is not limited in their actions. As such, the subject is capable of doing actions that
we are not capable of anticipating. To illustrate this, we will consider two situations in which the previous
algorithm’s cases lead to a false result.

The fall of the cubes. When the cubes fall, for instance because there is imbalance in the final structure created
by the subject, the cubes may fall on the table and bounce on the table, thus indicating that they are going up. As
such, the cubes may be considered in hand when they are not.

Inconstant movement. Given the nature of
the sensor’s cube, a final structure may not have a constant
movement while moving, for instance because the subject’s hand’s position relative to the sensor varies over time.
As such, the autonomous movement of a structure may be similar to the moving of the structure by the subject and
may not be identified properly.

These two cases are examples of limits of a rule-based algorithm for an ill-defined problem. In the current state,
we could just create new cases to take into account those two examples, but the point is that we are not able to list
this kind of algorithm is not a good method to tackle this
the cases exhaustively. As such,
identification.

it seems that

Moreover, it appears that, for some cases, the sample rate or the precision of sensors may make the case
obsolete or invalid. For instance, the “immobile cube” case, where a cube that is not moving since the last sample
is considered not in hand, may lead to invalid results when considering a sensor that is not precise enough to
determine that a cube in an immoble hand (the hand is necessarily moving a little) is in hand. As such, this
algorithm should be reconsidered each time different sample rates or different components are used, and we will
prefer more general algorithms for this.

Conclusion

The conception of the EscapeCube project faced a lot of different challenges. As such, it appears that the project
is not viable right now. In this section, we will sum up the different pitfalls and failures of the project and propose
different ideas and future work to move on the issue of data collection.

First, we faced a physical component problem. As we didn’t want to transform the activity, the choice of the
components was limited and the budget we fixed was exceeded. This excess implied a loss in terms of potential
data, as the reduced price in comparison to the original cubes was an argument for potential facilitators (teachers,
educators etc.) to choose this version instead of the original cubes.

5 Available at : https://github.com/BaptisteBenard/creacube\_projet\_s9

RT N° 0517

16

Axel Palaude, Lucie Bannay, Baptiste Bernard, Thierry Viéville

However, it is possible that the constraint of creating a new activity that is identical from the subject’s point of view
to the original CreaCube activity is not as important as it seems, for two reasons :

-

-

Extrinsic elements, such as how the subject feels, what is the prior knowledge of the subject etc. may be
more important factors of behavioral differences between subjects.
The point behind this constraint is to ensure that behavioral differences between subjects of CreaCube
and subjects of EscapeCube are not caused by the physical components themselves. However, the point
of CreaCube is not to study subjects’ behaviors specifically about the CreaCube activity but to better
understand skills about creativity and problem-solving. As such, some points of the original activity may
already be profitable or detrimental to the subject's behaviors, like, for instance, any visual cue such as
the visible presence of screws on the original cubes.

As such, the presence of differences between activities may not be that detrimental to data . In particular, cubes
including the elements we described in a previous section would probably have been bigger than the original
cubes without causing much trouble for the subjects. The same argument applies when it comes to the presence
(or absence) of external elements like one or more cameras.

7

6

We also tried to implement a rule-based algorithm to identify whether a cube is in hand or not. Because of the
open nature of the activity, it is impossible to predict an exhaustive list of cases (what if the cubes fall on the table,
below the table etc.). Moreover, it appears that some cases of this algorithm depend on sensors’ precision and
sample rate, potentially leading to invalid results if they change in the future. Other types of algorithms should be
considered.

If we are able to change the perspective, we could imagine a setup with gloves able to detect the gripping of the
cubes, with an immediate detection of whether a cube is in hand or not.

In the end, as we determined that external devices may be added to the CreaCube activity, we are working on the
idea of adding an eye-tracking device recording the eye movements of a subject during the experiment to the
already existing camera recording the hands during the experiment. This way, we will be able to have an additional
the subject may be
data stream from the subjective lived experience during the activity.
concentrated on a different cube than the handled one for instance. We still consider that external devices may
influence the behavior of a subject, but for the specific eye-tracking device (which are goggles that the subject puts
on), it appears that, after a short amount of time (that will be spent before the start of the activity), the subjects do
not pay attention to it anymore, as if they forgot its existence.

In this context,

Acknowledgement: This work is a collaboration between the ANR CreaMaker and the AEx AIDE , and students
from the ENSEIRB-MATMECA school
Margarida Romero, Chloe Mercier and Frédéric Alexandre are gratefully acknowledged for their precious advice
during the execution of this work and this report reviewing.

.10

9

8

6 On the contrary, it is possible that some minor changes to the physical components may help the data collection.
7 Bigger cubes are an example of potential beneficial changes to the activity : as they are more difficult to manipulate,
maybe we could observe the evolution of the body posture of the subject because of larger movements, and use these
large movements as new cues for the data analysis of the subject's behaviors.
8 https://creamaker.wordpress.com ANR CreaMaker (ANR-18-CE38-0001) project
9 https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne/en/aide/
10 https://enseirb-matmeca.bordeaux-inp.fr/fr

Inria

From CreaCube to EscapeCube : trying to add internal sensors to collect data automatically 17

Bibliography

Barnabé, S., Denet, L., Manrique, M., Menon, D., Pascual, É., Romero, M., & Viéville, T. (2020). A low-cost

tabletop game to collect learning analytics during computational thinking using unplugged or tangible

activities [Report, Inria]. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03040909

Palaude, A., Romero, M., & Viéville, T. (2022). Multimodal learning analytics for studying creative problem-solving

with modular robotics (Research Report RR-9467; p. 27). Inria & Labri, Université Bordeaux.

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03621919

Romero, M., Lepage, A., & Lille, B. (2017). Computational thinking development through creative

programming in higher education. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education,

14(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-017-0080-z

RT N° 0517

