A Mathematical Bias
Nicolas P. Rougier, Cédric Brun, Thomas Boraud

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier, Cédric Brun, Thomas Boraud. A Mathematical Bias. 2021. ￿hal-03184805￿

HAL Id: hal-03184805

https://hal.science/hal-03184805

Preprint submitted on 29 Mar 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

A Mathematical Bias
Nicolas P. Rougier1,2,3,†,∗
1Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest — 2LaBRI CNRS UMR 5289, Université de Bordeaux — 3Institute of
Neurodegenerative Diseases, CNRS UMR 5293, Université de Bordeaux — 4Université Bordeaux-
Montaigne —

and Thomas Boraud3,†

Corresponding author: nicolas.rougier@inria.fr.

, Cédric Brun3,4,†

Equal contributions —

†

∗

Abstract. Any Mathematical framework inside which we formalize explanations limits
the scope of behaviors we may consider and the type of explanations we might provide.
The problem is even more acute when a model provides accurate predictions. This
naturally leads us to restrict our investigation within the chosen framework, making us
blind to alternatives.

Introduction

In his book "Vision", David Marr [1] proposed three levels at which any machine
carrying out an information-processing task must be understood before one can be said
to have understood it completely. Namely, computational theory, representation
and algorithm & hardware implementation. This three-levels analysis has
durably inﬂuenced the neuroscience community during the last decades and is
still the center of intense discussion among researchers, especially concerning
the connections between the three levels. We won’t discuss the details of the
argument since our objective here is rather to address the ﬁrst recommendation
of Marr regarding the goal of computation. We deliberately emphasized the
because the original phrasing of Marr suggests implicitely two things: (i) there
If we consider a man-made device observed
is a goal and (ii) it is unique.
by another human being, the existence and uniqueness of such device can be
certainly acknowledged. However, if we apply the method to a living being,
existence and uniqueness are far from being obvious. Moreover, there is a
supplementary diﬃculty when we observe another living being because we’re
biased by our own cognition and we tend to interpret a behavior in light of our
own behavior, and education on that matter. Pareidolia, that is, our tendency
for identifying the perception of a stimulus as a face or an object, is a well
known trait of human perception. Such incorrect or biased perception has
been particularly well illustrated by the experiment of Heider and Simmel [2]
using a more complex apparatus. They shot a short movie displaying three
geometrical shapes wandering around the screen. With the exception of three
subjects in the three groups of observer, all subjects interpreted the movie in
terms of actions of animated beings. This is well known in cognitive science
and researchers try their best to not interpret animal behavior using their own
agenda. And yet, we pretend we may have a diﬀerent but stronger bias when
observing and modelling a behavior. That is, a bias that is not linked to our
cognition, but rather to our education and the language we chose for Science,
i.e. Mathematics. At this point, maybe a prudent move would be to ﬁrst re-
assess the unreasonable eﬀectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences
[3] before exposing our arguments. Our goal is not to refute the eﬀectiveness
nor the usefulness of Mathematics in Science, but rather to explain how their
very abstraction power may actually hinder our understanding of brain and
cognition.

Copyright (c) 2021 Rougier, Brun & Boraud. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC-BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original authors and source are credited.

Taking Advantage of Time

Before developing our point, let us ﬁrst introduce an unknown system that is
able to process some input and produce some output sequence. Let’s do three
experiments with this system:

Experiment
Trial 1
Trial 2
Trial 3

Input
2, 3, 1, 4
A, 7, 4, 6
9, -1, 2, 5

Output
-> 1, 2, 3, 4
-> 4, 6, 7
-> 2, 5, 9

Obviously, when presented with some input sequence, this system outputs a
diﬀerent sequence that appears to be made exclusively of elements from the
input sequence. We may thus ask what is the goal of such system or said
diﬀerently, what is the system doing ? If you are familiar with arithmetics
(and for the sake of the argument, we’ll assume that you are), it is hard not
to notice that (1) the input sequence is unordered, (2) the output sequence is
made exclusively of positive integers and (3) the output sequence is ordered
with increasing values. At this point, it is quite legitimate to assume the
unknown system is some kind of sorter of natural number. In fact, if you were
to perform another thousand experiments, we can guarantee that the results
would only conﬁrm this hypothesis. This means that we can now perfectly
predict the output of the initially unknown system. Going back to Marr’s
three level analysis, we can go down to the algorithmic level in order to ﬁnd
out what kind of sorting algorithm the system is using (e.g. bubble sort, bucket
sort, etc.) but, independently on the exact nature of this sorting algorthm, we
know that the implementation involves some comparisons (inter or intra) or
the moving/swapping of individual values. Having now a full description of
the system at all three levels, does that mean we have understood it?

Let us now introduce the real system which is a simple echo state network
with a single input channel, a single output channel and no feedback. This
network has been trained in a very peculiar fashion and has learned to output
the input value but with a delay whose amount (in seconds) corresponds to
the value of the input value. Said diﬀerently, if you feed X to the system, the
output will be X after X seconds have elapsed. Let us play with this model. If
we feed the sequence "3, 2, 1" at once (in less than 1 second), this model will
output 1 after one second, 2 after two seconds and 3 after three seconds such
that the output sequence reads "1, 2, 3". In other words, the output sequence
is ordered and you can extrapolate that this works for any numerical sequence
even though the answer of the system can take a lot of time depending on the
input values.

We can further formalize this neural system by writing an ideal model using a
very simple Python program:

import time, threading
def process(values):

def delay(value):

time.sleep(value/100)
print(value)
for value in values:

t = threading.Thread(target=delay, args=(value,))
t.start()

process([3,2,1])

As you can read (if you know the Python language), there is no comparison, nor
moving or swapping of values and no sorting per se. The question is then "what
is the system doing?" Is it actually sorting values by taking advantage of time
or is it merely outputing values with some delay? This is not a purely rhetorical
question because if you think the initially unknown system implements a sort
algorithm, then you’ll search for some evidence at the implementation level
such as comparison or swapping of values. Problem is that if the considered
system is complex enough, there are good chances to ﬁnd some incidental
evidences (e.g. correlated activities) that will confort your initial hypothesis
while it is false. This is actually the current situation regarding the Bayes
theory that may be used to predict behavior but this does not mean there
exists a Bayesian implementation inside the brain [4], even though people will
regularly report to have found some neural correlates. In our simple example,
the hypothesized sorting property derives from the (local) linearity of time
and mostly exists in the eye of the (educated and biased) observer. Without
further information on the system, we cannot decide if it is actually sorting.

Taking Advantage of Space

Let us now consider another illustrative problem. Suppose you want to study
how an animal, when presented with two options A and B, can learn to al-
ternatively choose A then B then A, etc. One typical lab setup to study such
alternate decision task is the T-maze environment where the animal is con-
fronted to a left or right turn and can be trained to display an alternate choice
behavior. This can be easily formalized using a block world as it is regularly
used in the computational literature: The question is then what are the mech-
anisms that allow an animal (or a model) to alternate decisions between left
and right? Given the aforementionned task formalization, you cannot really
escape some form of memory inside your model. For such a simple problem,
a one bit memory is enough and the simplest solution is probably to negate
(logically) this one bit memory each time you reach A or B. When located at
X, the model has only to read the value of this one bit memory in order to
decide to go to A or B. Going back to neuroscience, can we localize this one
bit memory inside the brain and identify when and where the switch occurs?
After an animal has been trained, selective brain lesions could be made to
various cerebral structures such as to identify the one(s) that disrupt the al-
ternating behavior. But there’s a fallacy in such reasoning. The fallacy is to
equate information and memory, and more precisely working memory. Con-
sider for example a slightly diﬀerent setup where the T-Maze is transformed
into a closed 8-Maze. Supposed you can only observe the white area while

the animal is evolving along the arrowed line (both in observable and non-
observable areas). From the observer point of view, the animal is turning left
one time out of two and turning right one time out of two. Said diﬀerently,
the observer can infer an alternating behavior because of its partial view of
the system. The question is: does the animal really implement an explicit

Figure 1: An expanded view of a T-Maze

alternate behavior or is it merely following a mildly complex dynamic path?
This is again not a rhetorical question because depending on your hypothesis,
you may search for neural correlates that do not exist. This is precisely what
happened with working memory that has long been thought to be contained
in the sustained activity of neurons in the prefrontal cortex. There are in-
deed a large number of studies that show such sustained activity and when
Rigotti et al. [5] analyzed single neuron activity recorded in the lateral PFC of
monkeys performing complex cognitive tasks, they also found several neurons
displaying task-related activity. However, once they discarded all the neurons
that were displaying task-related activity, they were still able to decode task
information using a simple linear decoder. This has been further conﬁrmed
by Strock, Hinaut, and Rougier [6] who designed a gated working memory
model where the information is encoded in the dynamics of the model such
that there is no trace of sustained activity while the information is maintained
and can be decoded anytime.

Decision without Value

One aspect of neuroscience that has been deeply impacted by Mathematics is
the ﬁeld of decision making, partly due to its proximity and tight links with
neuroeconomics. Probably, also, because of the common mathematical mod-
eling of decision theory that has been borrowed by neuroscientists from the
economists. As explained in [7], nearly all theories of decision, from expected utility
theory through prospect theory and even modern reinforcement learning algorithms
have shared the notion that in order to choose, the diﬀerent attributes of each option
must at some point be converged, however idiosyncratically, incompletely and imper-
fectly, into a single value for the actual process of comparison. This has been further
abstracted into the notion of common currency and mapped to a subregion
of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex / orbitofrontal cortex.
Indeed, using
various but ﬁnely controlled experimental setup, many studies have shown
a correlation between the activity in these regions and the diﬀerent options
present during a choice, making it diﬃcult to argue against such common cur-
rency concept [8, 9]. This illustrates quite clearly the inﬂuence of Mathematics:
decision is equated with value because Mathematics oﬀer no way of comparing

two unrelated objects. Let’s take a moment to see what this involves. Would
you rather receive $50 or $100? This is an easy question and the two options can
be easily compared using absolute monetary value. Would you rather receive
$50 for sure or $1000 with 10% chance? We introduce stochasticity but we can
use the expected value instead of the absolute value to make a decision. Would
you rather receive $50 or $100 in one year? Such temporal aspect can be formal-
ized using the concept of discounted value, where the absolute (or expected)
value can be modulated along the temporal dimension and leads to a decision.
Would you rather receive a $50 bill or 10,000 pennies? Here we have a problem.
Absolute, expected or discounted value points to the second option and yet,
we can make an educated guess that people would prefer option one. The rea-
son being the diﬀerent physicality of the two options, one being much more
cumbersome than the other. At this point, one could argue that the physicality
of an option could be simply integrated in the common currency, provided we
ﬁnd some way of both evaluating and valuing such physicality. But what if we
now introduce yet another unforeseen dimension? The story has potentially
no end.

Discussion

The mere act of choosing a Mathematical framework inside which we formal-
ize explanations of behavior is not a neutral process. Indeed, mathematical
modelling is only an instance of the necessary idealization of the complexity
of the brain that is a prerequisite to any scientiﬁc approach [10]. In biology,
there is a general tendency to project our 𝑛 dimensional object of interest
(were 𝑛 is unknown) onto an explanatory dimension chosen a priori whereas
we should ﬁrst determine how many dimensions (number of parameters) we
need in order to explain our problem and which are the most relevant. Our a
priori choice is determined by various biases that are not always consciously
addressed such as original background, scientiﬁc culture or previous studies
but do not rely on a global systemic approach and is therefore doom to fail
most of the time because the probability it provides relevant information is in-
versely proportional to the number of dimensions of the object we study. This
indeed implicitly constrains the range of behaviors we may consider and the
type of explanations or predictions we might provide. We tend to forget such
limits and the problem is even more acute when a model provides accurate
predictions or explanations. This naturally leads us to restrict our investiga-
tion within the chosen framework in order to explore the limits of a model or
an explanation. However, by doing so, we also shadow processes that may
completely escape the chosen framework while being nonetheless important if
not critical [11]. In that regards, the notion of value that has been proven many
times to be fruitful for unraveling some of the inner mechanism of decision
making is only relevant to a very speciﬁc kind of decision. If we forget this
simple fact, we may well provide models or explanations that would cease to
be felicitous falsehoods [12] and become plainly misleading, by overstepping the
perspectival framework in which they have been formulated.

References

[1] David Marr. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Repre-
sentation and Processing of Visual Information. New York, NY, USA: Henry
Holt and Co., Inc., 1982. isbn: 0716715678.

[2] Fritz Heider and Marianne Simmel. “An experimental study of apparent

behavior”. In: The American Journal of Psychology 57 (1944).

[3] Eugene P. Wigner. “The unreasonable eﬀectiveness of mathematics in
the natural sciences.” In: Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics
13.1 (Feb. 1960).

[4] Matt Jones and Bradley C. Love. “Bayesian Fundamentalism or En-
lightenment? On the explanatory status and theoretical contributions
of Bayesian models of cognition”. In: Behavioral and Brain Sciences 34.4
(Aug. 2011).

[5] Mattia Rigotti et al. “The importance of mixed selectivity in complex

cognitive tasks”. In: Nature 497.7451 (May 2013).

[6] Anthony Strock, Xavier Hinaut, and Nicolas P. Rougier. “A Robust Model
of Gated Working Memory”. In: Neural Computation 32.1 (Jan. 2020).
[7] Dino J Levy and Paul W Glimcher. “The root of all value: a neural
common currency for choice”. In: Current Opinion in Neurobiology 22.6
(Dec. 2012).

[8] Lotem Elber-Dorozko and Yonatan Loewenstein. “Striatal action-value

neurons reconsidered”. In: eLife 7 (May 2018).

[9] David Spurrett. “Need there be a common currency for decision-making?”

In: South African Journal of Philosophy 28.2 (Jan. 2009), pp. 210–221.
[10] Olivia Guest and Andrea E. Martin. “How Computational Modeling
Can Force Theory Building in Psychological Science”. In: Perspectives on
Psychological Science (Jan. 2021).

[11] Peter Bossaerts and Carsten Murawski. “From behavioural economics
to neuroeconomics to decision neuroscience: the ascent of biology in
research on human decision making”. In: Current Opinion in Behavioral
Sciences 5 (Oct. 2015), pp. 37–42.

[12] Catherine Z. Elgin. True Enough. MIT Press, 2017.

