When a Master of Sciences on EdTech becomes an International Community
Margarida Romero, Saint-Clair Lefèvre, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Saint-Clair Lefèvre, Thierry Viéville. When a Master
of Sciences on EdTech becomes an International Community. ERCIM News,
2020. ￿hal-02418510￿

HAL Id: hal-02418510

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02418510

Submitted on 18 Dec 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

When a Master of Sciences on EdTech becomes an International Community

by Margarida Romero

1 ​, Saint-Clair Lefèvre

1 ​ and Thierry Viéville

1,2

1 ​Learning, Innovation and Education (LINE), Université Côte d’Azur

2 ​Mnémosyne, INRIA

Nelson Mandela said, "Education is the most powerful weapon which you
can use to change

the world." How do we best achieve this? Part of the answer may lie in
Smart EdTech, a

Master of Science (MSc) program specialising in digital education.

The MSc SmartEdTech program [L1] at Université Côte d’Azur aims to
develop a quality

approach to digital education with a co-creative and participative
education. The program is

embedded within a socioeconomic sensibility, specifically related to the

Global Goals of the

United Nations in relation to education

[L2]. The challenge is to both improve today’s

education and create tomorrow’s education, by means of breakthrough
digital pedagogies.

The 21st century educational skills go beyond knowledge and know-how to
include Figure 1: ​ ​

important personal and collective competences, and societal values.

As illustrated in Figure 1, the end goal is to allow everyone to develop
the “21st century

​ ​ ​ ​ ​

skills”, focusing in critical thinking, creativity, problem solving,
collaboration and

computational thinking as key skills for citizens [1]. We also
illustrate how this could apply

to computational thinking as a key competency to solve problems through
the knowledge of

formal systems (how to code) and physical systems (what is a sensor, how
a network works,

etc). Through computational thinking development, the students should be
able to not only

use technology for education but engage in the critical approach of
analysing problem

situations, identify technologies to solve these problems.

The MSc SmartEdTech has been designed with an objective of inclusivity
to ensure that the

students are selected based on their projects and potential [2]. In
order to develop an

international community, 90% of the program is online, based on open
reusable resources in

English and some in French. This blended training also includes two
intensive weeks, to

really meet each other, and to learn and share and intern periods,
inside either an EdTech

company, or an educational research lab, while some students develop
their own spin-off

company. Msc SmartEdTech students are expected to become the future
e-learning or digital

innovation project managers, instructional designers, teacher or
e-learning instructors, edTech

consultants or researchers in the learning sciences. Students within the
MSc SmartEdTech

program are professionals from a diverse range of backgrounds including
quality assurance

professionnals in Higher Education, teachers and university professors,
app developers and

freelancers in the field of EdTech. MSc SmartEdTech are also engaged in
teaching activities

within the MSc, embodying the “communities of practices” (CoP) paradigm,
in which

everyone has the potential to act as a resource for the community.

As students, they will address the challenges of designing and
integrating EdTech in their

different educational contexts. Our conviction is that they have to
learn how to learn,

concretely, via effective competence development. The activities
developed in the program

support active learning approaches through co-creation approaches,
Digital game based

learning (DGBL), maker education and maker culture. With these different
activities,

students are engaged to develop a critical understanding of digital
sciences and embrace a

paradigm of (co)creators of technologies and, therefore, are more than
just EdTech

consumers. The core of our paradigm is project-based learning (PBL),
meaning that our

approach puts everyone’s professional project at the heart of learning,
right from the start. As

such, all courses become an opportunity to realise a given project,
while each student has the

opportunity to engage in small group teamwork or receive specific
coaching.

This MSc benefits from a threefold scientific approach, led by the
Learning, INnovation and

Education (LINE) research lab [L3], in computer science and education
science.

This EdTech MSc not only teaches high-tech tools, but also low-tech
approaches. For

instance, in order to teach children how a computer works, “unplugged
activities”, coupled

with creative programming initiation and education robotics, are the
pillars of computational

thinking learning [3]. In a nutshell, the main point is to use an
everyday situation as a

metaphor for a theoretical computer science concept.

Our approach is agnostic with respect to the available tools. This
positioning is crucial given

the huge social and environmental challenges facing our planet. Whilst
the use of digital

tools, in education or elsewhere, is neither a panacea, nor the inverse,
there are a few things

of which we are certain: (i) The core challenge is pedagogy: can digital
tools help us improve

the pedagogy we want to develop?

The MSc has been running for 18 months and to date our team of nine
teachers from six

countries have helped about 40 colleagues to contribute to “changing the
world through

education”. Out of the 12 pioneer students two have created a company or
other structure,

three are working in research positions, two have been hired by EdTech
companies, and the

remainder are working on personal projects.

Figure 2: The #CreaSmartEdtech Msc international map, featuring 40
students from 25

countries gathered to learn together, and start a true international
community.

Perhaps the most interesting and motivating aspect of this experience
is the way in which this

tiny, lively, global group has started to form a multicultural,
interdisciplinary and

international community, with a common objective, sharing ideas and
practices, being. This

is exactly what this initiative is striving for: to go beyond structured
teaching and learning

and to build an international community of practice (CoP) in 21st
century education.

Links:

[L1]

http://app.univ-cotedazur.fr/smartedtech

[L2] https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/education/

[L3]

http://unice.fr/laboratoires/line

References:

M. Romero, A. Lepage, B. Lille: “Computational thinking development
through

International Journal of Educational Technology

[1] creative programming in higher education”, (1), 42, 2017. 14 , in
Higher Education ​ ​

M. Ciussi, et al.: “Numérique et éducation … vous avez dit
#CreaSmartEdtech ?”,

[2] 2018. binaire.lemonde.fr,

https://tinyurl.com/y6n5pwvr

D.Menon, et al.: “Going beyond digital literacy to develop computational
thinking in

[3] K-12 education”, L. Daniela, (Routledge), In press, 9780367333799,
2019.

, Taylor & Francis Smart Pedagogy of Digital Learning ​

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-0228103

Please contact:

Margarida Romero

UCA, INSPE, LINE, France

margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr

​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​

​


