A pavlovian model of the amygdala and its influence within the medial
temporal lobe Maxime Carrere, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Maxime Carrere, Frédéric Alexandre. A pavlovian model of the amygdala
and its influence within the ￿10.3389/fnsys.2015.00041￿. medial temporal
lobe. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2015, pp.14. ￿hal-01145790￿

HAL Id: hal-01145790

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01145790

Submitted on 4 May 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

ORIGINAL RESEARCH published: 18 March 2015 doi:
10.3389/fnsys.2015.00041

A pavlovian model of the amygdala and its inﬂuence within the medial
temporal lobe

Maxime Carrere 1, 2, 3 and Frédéric Alexandre 2, 1, 3*

1 LaBRI, UMR 5800, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, Université de Bordeaux, Talence,
France, 2 Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France, 3 Institut des
Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, CNRS, Université de Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France

Recent advances in neuroscience give us a better view of the inner
structure of the amygdala, of its relations with other regions in the
Medial Temporal Lobe (MTL) and of the prominent role of neuromodulation.
They have particularly shed light on two kinds of neurons in the basal
nucleus of the amygdala, the so-called fear neurons and extinction
neurons. Fear neurons mediate context-dependent fear by receiving
contextual information from the hippocampus, whereas extinction neurons
are linked with the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and involved in fear
extinction. The computational model of the amygdala that we describe in
this paper is primarily a model of pavlovian conditioning, but its
architecture also emphasizes the central role of the amygdala in the MTL
memory processes through three main information ﬂows. (i) Thalamic and
higher order sensory cortical inputs including from the perirhinal
cortex are received in the lateral amygdalar nucleus, where CS-US
associations can be acquired. (ii) These associations are subsequently
modulated, in the basal nucleus of the amygdala, by contextual inputs
coming from the hippocampus and the mPFC. Basal fear and extinction
neurons indicate the currently valid association to their main targets
including in the MTL and the mPFC. (iii) The competition for the choice
of the pavlovian response is ultimately performed by projection of these
amygdalar neurons in the central nucleus of the amygdala where, beyond
motor responding, a hormonal response, including cholinergic modulation,
is also triggered via the basal forebrain. In turn, acetylcholine
modulates activation in the basal nucleus and facilitates learning in
the hippocampus. Based on biologically founded arguments, our model
replicates a number of biological experiments, proposes some predictions
about the role of amygdalar regions and describes pavlovian conditioning
as a distributed systemic learning, binding memory processes in the MTL.

Keywords: amygdala, pavlovian conditioning, hippocampus, perirhinal
cortex, infralimbic cortex, acetylcholine

1.  Introduction

Since the seminal studies by Pavlov, respondent conditioning has been
extensively studied, both at the behavioral and neurophysiological
levels. Particularly, fear conditioning, contextual fear extinc- tion
and renewal are prototypical protocols that brought much knowledge about
the corresponding behaviors and neuronal circuitry. In these protocols,
an unconditioned stimulus (US) corresponds to a biologically signiﬁcant
stimulus (e.g., an electric shock) that automatically triggers a fear

Edited by: Vassilis Cutsuridis, Foundation for Research and Technology -
Hellas, Greece

Reviewed by: José M. Delgado-García, University Pablo de Olavide,
Seville, Spain Ahmed A. Moustafa, University of Western Sydney,
Australia

*Correspondence: Frédéric Alexandre, Institut des Maladies
Neurodégénératives, 146 rue Léo Saignat, Bordeaux, 33076, France
frederic.alexandre@inria.fr

Received: 23 December 2014 Accepted: 27 February 2015 Published: 18
March 2015

Citation: Carrere M and Alexandre F (2015) A pavlovian model of the
amygdala and its inﬂuence within the medial temporal lobe. Front. Syst.
Neurosci. 9:41. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00041

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

1

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

response (e.g., freezing). In fear conditioning, an initially neutral
stimulus (the CS: conditioned stimulus) is repeatedly paired with the US
during an acquisition phase. Subsequently, the CS pre- sented alone
triggers a fear response, which can be interpreted as an anticipation of
the occurrence of the US by the CS. For exam- ple, Herry et al. (2008)
describes this protocol in mice, with the ﬁrst conditioned response
appearing as soon as the third CS-US association. Conditioning is not
necessarily related to a salient stimulus but can also involve the
context in which conditioning occurs. In contextual fear conditioning,
the spatial context (the chamber in which the rat is placed before
receiving an electric shock) can become a strong predictor of the US
(Fanselow, 2000). Fear extinction occurs when, in some context, the CS
is pre- sented but not followed by the US. In this case, CS might lose
its ability to trigger a fear response but this is a long process (9–12
trials needed in Herry et al. (2008) to extinguish the asso- ciation)
and also rather fragile: when the animal is put back in the original
conditioning environment, the CS-US association is renewed immediately.
This indicates that extinction is a context- dependent process and that,
during extinction, the association is not forgotten but only inhibited
(Maren, 2005). Renewal only consists in releasing the inhibition.

The neuronal circuitry of pavlovian conditioning has bene- ﬁted from
extensive studies, from the molecular to the behavioral levels. The
amygdala plays a central role in that circuitry, imple- menting
pavlovian conditioning as a learning process to extract emotional values
of stimuli in the world and to trigger corre- sponding emotional
responses. It is composed of several nuclei with distinct roles and
physiological properties. Following most of the literature, three nuclei
will be more particularly consid- ered here: the lateral nucleus (LA),
the basal nucleus (BA) and the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA). In
summary, the for- mer two nuclei share some properties with the cortex
(composed of excitatory glutamatergic principal neurons) and integrate
sen- sory information, while the CeA nucleus is more similar to the
striatal regions of the basal ganglia (inhibitory gabaergic neurons)
(LeDoux, 2007) and is responsible for the motor, hormonal and autonomic
expression of pavlovian responses.

Pavlovian processes are supposed to result

from the interactions between the amygdala and other cerebral
structures, particularly in the Medial Temporal Lobe (MTL). Accumulated
experimental evidences about these interactions contribute to a better
understanding of the inner amygdalar processes and of their role within
the MTL.

Concerning sensory input, it is widely acknowledged that LA is
responsible for learning CS-US association in fear condition- ing
(LeDoux, 2007). LA receives sensory input from the thalamus and the
cortex (including pain-related information). Thalamic input brings crude
sensory information (like a pure tone); corti- cal processing builds
more elaborated sensory information (that might correspond to more
structured CS) along its ventral axis including key regions of the MTL,
like the perirhinal cortex. Fear responses in LA are rather short (100
ms reported in Burgos- Robles et al., 2009). As shown in Pendyam et
al. (2013), longer CS will elicit (via LA) a sustained activity in the
pre-limbic region (PL) of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) that
projects in turn to BA where more complex associations can be learned.

BA is the region of the amygdala that has beneﬁted from the largest
expansion in the recent evolutionary process (Cardinal et al., 2002). It
integrates information from LA and is a key struc- ture at the interface
with other cerebral regions. BA plays a major role in contextual fear
conditioning (Goosens and Maren, 2001; Biedenkapp and Rudy, 2009),
particularly due to its aﬀerences from the hippocampus, essential for
learning to integrate cues in their spatial and temporal context
(Eichenbaum et al., 2012; Carretero-Guillén et al., 2013). BA is also
widely reported to be involved in extinction, particularly due to its
aﬀerences from the infralimbic (IL) division of the mPFC (Sierra-Mercado
et al., 2011), a region reported to keep track of the recent reward
history (Wallis, 2007). These roles were particularly well-corroborated
by the observation in Herry et al. (2008) of two distinct populations of
neurons in BA, called fear and extinction neurons, diﬀeren- tially
connected to the hippocampus and the IL and respectively involved in
contextual fear conditioning and extinction.

In addition to its central role in providing emotional signif- icance of
events to structures responsible for instrumental con- ditioning
(Cardinal et al., 2002; Balleine and Killcross, 2006) (particularly the
ventral striatum and the mPFC), BA also partici- pates in a fundamental
learning process in the MTL, favoring the transfer of cortical
information from the perirhinal cortex to the entorhinal cortex and the
hippocampus (Paz and Paré, 2013), to create in this latter structure an
episodic memory of the current situation, based on its emotional
signiﬁcance.

CeA is primarily considered as the motor pole of the amyg- dala,
triggering pavlovian motor responses. In the case of fear conditioning,
Ciocchi et al. (2010) reports projections from LA and BA nuclei,
sometimes passing through masses of inhibitory intercalated cells (ITC),
reaching in the lateral subdivision of CeA, so-called CeLOn and CeLOﬀ
neurons. These neurons respectively participate in the excitation and
inhibition of the medial subdivision of CeA (CeM), driving fear
response. Direct projections from ITC to CeM are also reported to
participate in the inhibition of fear response (Amano et al., 2010; Lee
et al., 2013). Freezing behavior is triggered via the periaqueductal
gray (PAG) and this motor response is generally considered in exper-
imental works as a marker of fear expression and its measure is used to
evaluate the level of conditioning (LeDoux, 2007; Herry et al., 2008;
Ciocchi et al., 2010; Sierra-Mercado et al., 2011). Another component of
pavlovian responses involves neuromod- ulators and neuropeptides (Lee et
al., 2013), introducing global factors (for example related to the level
of attention, stress, nov- elty, etc. of the corresponding episode) in
the elaboration of pavlovian conditioning. Among multiple roles
attributed to neu- romodulators (including some still in discussion),
the release of acetylcholine (ACh) by the basal forebrain has been
proposed in Yu and Dayan (2005) to be a marker of the level of
uncertainty of the environment. Concerning its impact, ACh is
characterized by a role in memory process, by switching the hippocampus
in the storage mode (Hasselmo, 2006) and by its ability to modify the
balance of activation between BA and LA: particularly a high level of
ACh was experimentally associated in fear conditioning to a higher
activation in the BA region (Calandreau et al., 2006). At the moment,
the diversity and complementarity of the roles of amygdalar nuclei and
regions have been poorly incorporated

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

2

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

in computational models, whereas they seem critical in light of the
recent physiological studies. Early models of pavlovian conditioning
were mainly interested in deﬁning an associative learning rule, to
relate sensory inputs to a faithful prediction of US. Some are based on
the Rescorla-Wagner competitive error- driven learning rule (Rescorla
and Wagner, 1972), that modiﬁes the associational weights as a function
of the error of predic- tion of the US. Others draw inspiration from the
Makintosh rule (Mackintosh, 1975) and lay emphasis on the associative
history of the sensory cues. As each kind of rules best explains spe-
ciﬁc aspects of pavlovian conditioning, hybrid models have also been
proposed (Le Pelley, 2004), integrating in a single learn- ing rule
speciﬁc processings on the CS and US information. All these models can
be considered behavioral, in the sense that they mainly insist on the
accuracy of US prediction and not on a real- istic representation of
information in the inner neuronal mech- anisms. For example in many
models (Schmajuk and DiCarlo, 1992; Kruschke, 2001), the sensory input
is a unique vector of neurons, with some undiﬀerentiated neurons
representing “the context.”

With the advance of neurobiological knowledge about pavlo- vian
conditioning, some models were developed to describe the interplay
between the amygdala, the mPFC, the posterior cortex and the hippocampus
(Armony et al., 1997; Meeter et al., 2005; Pauli et al., 2011; Moustafa
et al., 2013) but do not diﬀerentiate the BA and LA regions. Others
integrate more biophysical details (Li et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2013;
Pendyam et al., 2013), but they remain at the level of simple CS-US
association in LA. Recently, Vlachos et al. (2011) proposed a model
integrating experimen- tal observation in BA by Herry et al. (2008) of
fear and extinction neurons but the model restricts amygdalar
contribution to the BA nucleus.

None of these existing models are diﬀerentiating LA and BA nuclei and
particularly their speciﬁc contributions to diﬀerent MTL pathways. We
have designed an integrated model of the amygdala where each main
nucleus has been modeled such that it is possible to understand and
diﬀerentiate its interplay with other regions of the MTL (the
hippocampus and the perirhinal cor- tex) and also with speciﬁc regions
of the mPFC (IL). This model, replicating a number of recent
experimental results in electro- physiology, underlines the
complementary roles of the BA and LA nuclei in the exchanges with these
regions and the critical role of the ACh neuromodulation.

2.  Materials and Methods

2.1. Network Architecture and Functioning Rules Our modeling study uses
the DANA library for neuronal repre- sentation and computation (Rougier
and Fix, 2012) and is coded in Python.

Though our study takes special care to model neuronal dynamics in the
amygdala, it also includes a basic representa- tion of the cortex (this
term in the model refers to the spectrum of sensory inputs from the
thalamus to the perirhinal cortex, as reported above), the hippocampus,
the mPFC (including IL) and the basal forebrain (including cholinergic
neurons), as depicted in Figure 1. Importantly, this ﬁgure also
indicates information

ﬂows implemented between these structures. At the implemen- tation
level, one connection between two neuronal structures consists of a full
connectivity between neurons of the input and output populations.

Special eﬀorts were made to keep a reduced number of param- eters and to
test that the model was not too sensitive to their change (cf. Table 1
for a summary of all the parameters men- tioned throughout the paper).

The amygdala is represented by ﬁve diﬀerent neuronal popu- lations. In
addition to a population of neurons representing the lateral nucleus
(LA), the basal nucleus is represented by a popula- tion of fear neurons
(BAf) and a population of extinction neurons (BAe) in mutual inhibition,
as described in Herry et al. (2008). The central nucleus (CeA) also
possesses two populations, to model CeLOn and CeLOﬀ neurons triggering
and inhibiting fear responses as reported in Ciocchi et al. (2010).

The cortex and hippocampus provide sensory inputs, respec- tively to LA
and BAf. They are represented by input vectors (Cortex and Hippo), fed
by an input ﬂow depending on the learn- ing protocol, as described in
Section 2.4. Similarly, IL provides a contextual input IL to BAe, as a
vector of the same size as Hippo, intended to represent contexts of
extinction from the monitoring of reward history (Wallis, 2007).

Other variables are made available throughout the amyg- dala. US is a
boolean variable indicating if a fearful US has been received. ERR is
the error of prediction reported in Li and McNally (2014) to be computed
in the PAG and sent back to the amygdala. ACh is the tonic level of ACh
broadcast by the basal forebrain to all the network (McGaugh, 2004).

The output of the system is elaborated by the mutual inhi- bition
between CeLOn and CeLOﬀ neurons and the resulting activity in the CeLOn
neurons, reported to be responsible for trig- gering the fear response
via the medial subdivision of CeA (Cioc- chi et al., 2010), will be
considered here as the level of prediction of the US. All these
relations between neuronal structures are consistent with bibliographic
information reported in the section above and are depicted in Figure 1.

For each neuron i in an amygdalar population Amyg receiving an input
from a cerebral structure or another amygdalar popu- lation (both kinds
referred to as Input), its level of activation is evaluated through two
main variables, V representing the mem- brane potential and U the ﬁring
rate, as classically deﬁned with the mean-ﬁeld formalism:

dV

Amyg i dt Amyg U i

= (cid:16)−V

Amyg i

Amyg − Input ij

-   F (cid:16)6jW Amyg i

= noise (cid:16)sigmoid (cid:16)V

(cid:17)(cid:17) − 6kW

Input ∗ U j

(cid:17)(cid:17) /τ Amyg − Inhib ik

∗ UInhib k

τ is a time constant deﬁning the dynamics of activity evolution and set
to 0.05 throughout all the experiments. F is a non-linear threshold
function:

F(U) = max(min_value, U − θ )

where min_value is a small value, set to 10−3 and θ is set to 0.3. A
sigmoid (non-linear) function is applied to V to obtain the ﬁring

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

3

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

FIGURE 1 | Main features of our model of the amygdala. LA and BAf are
two fear neurons populations, which differ by their afferent
connections. LA learn to predict fear based on sensory input from cortex
and thalamus, and projects to BAf and CeLON. BAf receive contextual LA,
resulting in a prediction based on both sensory or contextual

inputs from Hippocampus and sensory-based prediction from

rate U and a noise() function is added to represent intrinsic neu- ronal
noise, using a uniform distribution centered on the value sigmoid(V).
Results reported here are robustly obtained with an interval length of
1% of sigmoid(V). Yet raising noise up to 20% does not alter network
performance on the diﬀerent paradigms. Dynamics are still similar with
even higher noise, but network predictions become less precise.

Input U j

is the ﬁring rate of the jth neuron of the Input popula-

tion, rectiﬁed to positive values and W is the value of the synaptic
weight between this neuron and the neuron i consid- ered in the
equation. The weights are modiﬁed according to the learning rules deﬁned
in Section 2.2 below.

Amyg−Input ij

Principal neurons in BA and LA are glutamatergic neurons and all the
WInput weights are considered excitatory. Inhibitory weights WInhib
coming from inhibitory populations Inhib and inﬂuencing the evaluation
of U in amygdalar populations are intended to integrate several cases.
GABAergic CeLOn and CeLOﬀ neurons are reported to be directly in mutual
inhibition (Ciocchi et al., 2010). Mutual inhibition is also mediated by
local inhibitory neurons between BAf fear neurons and BAe extinction
neurons (Herry et al., 2008), and between LA glutamatergic neu- rons
(Lee et al., 2013). All these cases of mutual inhibition might also be
viewed as a global eﬀect at the population level and will not be
considered for learning below.

inputs from medial Prefrontal Cortex (Infralimbic cortex, IL)

information. BAe is a population of extinction neurons receiving
contextual inhibition and respectively during extinction. BAe and BAf
are in mutual project to CeLOn and CeLOff populations in CeA. CeLOn and
CeLOff are also in mutual US prediction of the model.

inhibition. CeLOn activity is considered as the level of

2.2. Learning Rules Plasticity is implemented on connections from Cortex
to LA, and from Hippocampus and IL to BAf and BAe, respectively. The
other weights are kept constant. The initial values of all the weights
are drawn from an uniform distribution with an interval length of 0.04,
centered on 0.03 for learning weights and centered on 0.2 for constant
excitatory weights from LA or BAf to CeLOn and from BAe to CeLOﬀ, and on
0.1 from LA to BAf. Inhibitory weights are centered on 0.25 within LA
and between CeLOn and CeLOﬀ and on 0.05 between BAf and BAe.

Concerning LA and BAf, both engaged in learning to pre- dict fear
(respectively from a feature encoded in the cortex or a context encoded
in the hippocampus), learning obeys a Rescorla- Wagner like rule:

ij

dWPost − Pre dt

= ERR ∗ US ∗ α ∗ UPre

j

∗ UPost i

where Pre and Post are the presynaptic and post-synaptic pop- ulations,
α is a constant learning coeﬃcient (set to 1.0 for LA, BAf and BAe
post-synaptic neurons) and US is the value of the US, received as deﬁned
in the learning protocol described in Sec- tion 2.4 below. ERR = (US −
UCeLOn) is the prediction error and implements the main idea of the
Rescorla-Wagner rule: weights stabilize when the output of the network
UCeLOn is able to predict

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

4

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

TABLE 1 | Parameters describing network architecture and parameters used
in activation and learning rules.

Parameter

Meaning

Value

ARCHITECTURAL PARAMETERS

input_size

la_size

baf_size

bae_size

CeLOn_size

CeLOff_size

Size of input vectors from cortex, hippo, IL

Number of neurons in la

Number of neurons in baf

Number of neurons in bae

Number of neurons in CeLOn

Number of neurons in CeLOff

10

10

10

10

1

1

EQUATION PARAMETERS

Amygdala neurons time constant

0.05

τ

α

il_tau

noise_level

θ

ACh_min

ACh_max

ACh_strength

Modulates learning speed in LA, BAf and BAe

Time constant for ACh equation

% of neurons intrinsic noise

Neurons input threshold

Minimum of ACh level

Maximum of ACh level

Modulates effect of ACh concentration on BA

ACh_uncertainty_ strength

Modulates effect of uncertainty on ACh concentration

wmin

wmax

Cel_input_W

Minimum for modiﬁable weights initialization

Maximum for modiﬁable weights initialization

Constant weights from BAf, BAe and LA to Cel

LA_to_BAf_W

Constant weights from LA to BAf

LA_inhib_W

Cel_inhib_W

Constant weights inside LA

Constant weights between CelOn and CelOff

BA_inhib_W

Constant weights between BAf and BAe

1

5

1

0.3

1

2.5

0.5

5

0.01

0.05

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.25

0.05

the actual US, else they are modiﬁed as a function of the predic- tion
error. The present equation, designed for fear neurons, also implies
that these neurons will only learn when the fearful US is received (if
not, US = 0 and dW = 0).

The learning rule of connections between IL and extinction neurons in
BAe is designed to track changes in the accuracy of prediction of the US
and is sensitive to negative values of the pre- diction error ERR, when
the US is predicted but not coming (as the main intention is to report
extinction).

dWBAe − IL ij dt

= −ERR ∗ α ∗ UBAe

i

∗ UIL j

In the experiments reported below, UIL is designed to be active only
when the recent history of US arrival indicates an extinction context,
as it has been proposed that IL is computing such statis- tics (Wallis,
2007). This results in preventing IL-BAe connections from learning an
extinction context in the case of stochastic US occurrence (Yu and
Dayan, 2005) and from unlearning when ERR is positive.

2.3. The Role of Neuromodulation Based on information ﬂows described
above, LA, BAf, and BAe populations predict a fearful US or an
extinction context and acti- vate CeLOn or CelOﬀ populations with a
degree of conﬁdence depending on the degree of matching between their
actual input and their learnt experience. In this simple view, the
resulting pre- diction is only a function of the indirect competition
between LA and BA populations, accumulated in CeA. In our model, we
propose, in accordance to biological observations (Calandreau et al.,
2006), that cholinergic modulation is going to play an addi- tional role
in this competition, primarily by modulating the lev- els of activation
in BA. Accordingly, UBAf and UBAe are going to be computed as described
above and multiplied by a value representing the tonic level of ACh,
ACh.

ACh = ach_strength ∗

baseline + ach_uncertainty_strength (cid:0) ∗ noise (cid:16)sigmoid
(cid:16)VACh

(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17) dVACh/dt = (cid:16)−VACh + F (|ERR|)(cid:17)
/τACh

where baseline is the baseline level of tonic ACh (set to 1.0), τACh is
the constant of time set to 5, F is the threshold function and ERR the
prediction error deﬁned above. ach_strength mod- ulates the eﬀect of ACh
concentration on BA activities, and is set to 0.5.
ach_uncertainty_strength modulates the eﬀect of the recent uncertainty
VACh on ACh concentration, and is set to 5. This simple formula is
intended to represent the level of known uncertainty (or stochasticity)
of the environment, as this role is attributed to ACh in Yu and Dayan
(2005). In short, these authors argue that in case of high stochasticity
(as can be measured by frequent errors of prediction, whatever their
sign), the decision should not rely on precise cues but rather promote
the role of the context, hence the interest for ACh to favor BA
receiving more contextual information as compared to LA receiving
well-learnt sensory cues from the cortex.

2.4. Deﬁning Learning Protocols The model has to be activated to
represent behavioral episodes including sensory events, motor responses
and neuronal activa- tion taking place in space and time. The goal of
the experiments reported in the next section is to reproduce protocols
described in experimental papers and to compare both model responses and
internal activations to that reported in the papers, includ- ing in the
case of some manipulations on the sensory inputs as well as on internal
factors. We explain here how this procedure is implemented, concerning
model activation and monitoring. Since this study is dedicated to
pavlovian learning, the critical aspect is about representation in space
and time of the sensory inputs. Concerning time, each behavioral episode
is divided in three phases (see Figure 2). In the ﬁrst phase, the
external input is set on the Cortex, Hippo and IL vectors and remains
for 500 cycles, for network activity stabilization. At the end of this
phase, the activity in the CeLOn neuron gives the prediction of US by
the network.

In the second phase, the US is given (possibly with value 0 in case of
noUS) and remains for 500 cycles. At the very beginning of this phase,
the error of prediction ERR is computed and the

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

5

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

FIGURE 2 | In our experimental protocol, each trial is composed of three
phases of identical duration. In the ﬁrst phase, only the sensory CS
and/or the context is shown to the network. The second phase is the
learning

phase, and begins with US arrival. Prediction error is computed based of
the network output at the end of phase 1. During phase 3, no input is
presented and amygdalar neurons return to their baseline level of
activation.

learning weights and level of ACh are updated. In the third phase with
500 cycles, no input are given and the network comes back to a rest
state, ready for the next episode. Except for the simple case of
extinction (US is anticipated but not occurring), we do not experiment
variability of events in time. In our model, cortical, hippocampal, and
IL inputs are represented by a vector of units representing sensory
features and contexts. In these structures, in normal conditions, an
input will correspond to a vector with one strongly activated unit
(level of activation set to 1 in Hippo and IL and to 1.5 in Cortex) and
the other units set to randomized values uniformly drawn between 0 and n
= 1/size_of _the_vector. The strong activation is intended to represent
salient features cap- tured by an attentional process (as it is often
the case in pavlovian conditioning) and the other ﬂuctuating smaller
values represent noise or non-signiﬁcant details. It is hypothetized
that learning could also perform well with lower levels of activation
but would require more trials.

3.  Results

In all the experiments reported in this paper, the architecture of the
network was deﬁned as follows: Input vectors Cortex, Hippo, and IL are
of size 10 and LA, BAf, and BAe populations are composed of 10 neurons.
For these simple experiments on fear conditioning, there are only one
CeLOn and one CeLOﬀ neuron. The goal of the experiments is to run our
model on speciﬁc protocols related to pavlovian learning and to compare
its acti- vation with observations reported in experimental papers,
specif- ically emphasizing in a ﬁrst set of experiments the complemen-
tary roles of the BA and LA nuclei in the exchanges with other MTL
regions and in the second set, the critical role of the ACh
neuromodulation.

3.1. Extinction-Renewal Experiment The activation of LA, BAf, and BAe
populations has been con- trasted in the simulation of the classical
pavlovian paradigms of fear conditioning, fear extinction and renewal
and compared to results reported in Herry et al. (2008) and Ciocchi et
al. (2010).

In the acquisition phase, a sensory CS (input from the cortex to LA) and
a context CTX1 (input from hippocampus to BAf) are presented together to
the network (phase 1) and maintained until the arrival of the US (phase
2). This trial is repeated 11 times, to ensure both full fear
acquisition and ACh return to base- line after acquisition. In the
extinction phase, CS is paired with another context, CTX2 (phase 1),
without any US presentation in phase 2. This trial is repeated 14 times.
For renewal, CS in paired again with CTX1 and the US prediction is
observed at the end of phase 1.

Figure 3 shows the responses of the model to the condi- tioning,
extinction and renewal paradigms. In the conditioning phase, both LA and
BAf populations are strengthening their connections with respectively
the Cortex and Hippocampus, so that in a few trials, CeLOn activity is
correctly predicting US arrival (Figure 3B). BAe and CeLOﬀ activities
are decreas- ing due to respectively BAf and CeLOn inhibition. Figure 3A
shows that learning is similarly distributed between LA and BAf. Since
uncertainty is high in the ﬁrst trials, ACh concen- tration rises,
allowing BAf to learn faster. As soon as the net- work is making better
US prediction, uncertainty and ACh concentration decrease, and LA and
BAf responses equilibrate. Figure 3E Shows that both LA and BAf weights
increase during conditioning.

During extinction, LA ﬁring rates remain stable, BAf activ- ity starts
to increase due to ACh eﬀect, then decreases as BAe increases and
inhibits BAf. BAe increase of activity also provokes an increase in
CeLOﬀ activation, which causes the inhibition of CeLOn activation still
powered by LA (Figure 3C). Since no US is presented, only weights to
extinction neurons can learn and strengthen (Figure 3F). During renewal,
IL is no longer provid- ing extinction signal, which causes BAe to stop
ﬁring, and restau- res both BAf and CeLOn ﬁring, thus enabling the
immediate renewal of the fear response. Figure 3G shows how ACh con-
centration is changing, depending on uncertainty, and is helping
extinction acquisition in BAe. The observed neuronal dynamics of BAf and
BAe populations is in full accordance with exper- iments reported in
Herry et al. (2008) and reproduced by the

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

6

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

FIGURE 3 | Trial 1 (not shown here) was a trial without any stimulus
presentation for network stabilization to baseline values. Fear
conditioning takes place from trial 2 to trial 10. Fear extinction from
trial 11 to trial 21. Renewal is tested in trial 22. Graphs (A–D) are
showing average activities at the moment of US arrival. Graphs (E,F)
show average weights evolutions, normalized by their initial values.
Graphs (G,H) show the evolution of ACh concentration over trials. (A)
Both LA (blue triangles) and BAf (blue squares) activities increase
during conditioning. BAe activity (green squares) decreases due to BAf
inhibition. After a few trials, BAf reaches a maximum, then decreases
weakly, due to ACh decrease. (B) Due to LA and BAf increase, CeLOn (blue
circles) activity increases, and correctly predicts US arrival after
conditioning. CeLOff activity (green circles) is inhibited by CeLOn (C)
during the ﬁrst trials, uncertainty rises, so does ACh, and BAf
increases

weakly. After a few trials, BAe activity starts to overcome BAf
inhibition, and BAe strongly increases, which provokes BAf inhibition.
LA ﬁring rates remain steady. In the renewal context, IL does not
provide any longer extinction information to BAe, which stops BAe ﬁring
and releases its inhibition on BAf. (D) During extinction, CeLOff
activity increases with BAe increase and overcome CeLOn inhibition,
still powered by LA ﬁring. In the renewal trial, CeLOff is no longer
sustained by BAe, and CeLOn activity is restored to conditioning value.
(E) LA (blue triangles) and BAf (blue squares) weights are increasing
during conditioning. BAe (green squares) remain steady. (F) Only BAe
weights are increasing, with a higher rate as BAe starts winning the
competition against BAf. (G,H) ACh increases with uncertainty, when the
network makes prediction errors, and starts decreasing when the network
correctly performs the task.

modeling study in Vlachos et al. (2011). Dynamics in LA was not
considered in these papers, whereas our experiments suggest a contrasted
course of activity in LA, as compared to BA. This will be discussed in
Section 4.

We tested and report in Figure 4 the eﬀect of ACh deple- tion in
extinction/renewal paradigms. ACh is set to a constant level of 0.5,
i.e., 50% of the baseline level. Fear acquisition is not impaired, even
if learning essentially takes place in LAf

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

7

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

FIGURE 4 | See caption of Figure 3 for trial description. (A–D) ACh
concentration is ﬁxed to 0.5 for modeling the effect of ACh depletion
during all the process of extinction. (E–H) Similar to Figure 3. The
network is tested in the extinction context with an ACh depletion in the
last trial only. The last trial is showing extinction with ACh depletion
instead of renewal as in (A–D). (A) Fear acquisition is mostly performed
by LA increase of activity (blue triangles) during learning, which
compensates the weaker learning in BAf (blue squares). BAe activity
(green squares) remains steady, since BAf inhibition does not increase.
(B) CeLOn activity (blue circles) increases, and correctly predicts US
arrival at the end of the conditioning period. Thus, conditioning is not
impaired by ACh depletion. CeLOff activity (green circles)

is inhibited by CeLOn increase of activity. (C) LA activities remain
high as in non-ACh depleted extinction. BAe activities only increase
weakly, which is not sufﬁcient to lower BAf ﬁring rate, which remains
steady. (D) CeLOn activity does not decrease during extinction, since
BAe low increase cannot inhibit LA ﬁring. Extinction learning with ACh
depletion is impaired. (E,F) Conditioning without ACh depletion, similar
to Figure 3. (G,H) Extinction without ACh depletion, up to trial 21. In
trial 22, ACh is depleted by ﬁxing its level to 0.5, which provokes a
decrease in BAe activity. This allows a weak increase in BAf ﬁring rate.
BAe decrease also provokes a decrease in CeLOff inhibition, thus
enabling CeLOn to ﬁre again. Extinction learning is impaired, yet not
suppressed, by ACh depletion.

(Figure 4A). Extinction learning is impaired by ACh depletion: BAe
neurons takes longer to learn and to overcome BAf inhi- bition, and so
CeLOﬀ cell cannot inhibit CeLOn activity (cf. Figure 4C). To study the
eﬀect of ACh depletion not only on learning, but on the competition
between LA and BA, as reported in Figures 4G,H, we tested the eﬀect of
ACh depletion after

extinction training. ACh level is set to 0.5 in the last trial, in the
extinction context. BAe activity decreases, which induces a weak
increase in BAf, and a strong decrease in CeLOﬀ activity, allowing CeLOn
to ﬁre again, thus impairing extinction. Higher levels of ACh depletion
(not shown in ﬁgures) impair even more extinction memory, which is
consistent with results showing that

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

8

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

injections of ACh antagonist scopolamine in the amygdala after
extinction conditioning impair extinction (Prado-Alcalá et al., 1994).

3.2. The Role of Cholinergic Modulation The study proposed in Calandreau
et al. (2006) has also been replicated using our model where, after a
classical CS-US pairing, the events are unpaired to mimick a certain
level of uncertainty. Depending on levels of ACh (normal or modiﬁed),
Calandreau et al. (2006) investigates if the CS or the context best
predicts the US. In that paper, the unpairing is performed by inserting
various delays between CS and US. In our study, we do not experiment
variability in time (cf. the concluding section for discussion on
implementing PL and other prefrontal structures involved in this kind of
processing). Instead, the unpairing experiment is carried

out by randomly varying the salience of the sensory CS. Its level of
activation is multiplied by a number taken randomly in a uni- form
distribution between 0 and 1. These limits correspond to the two extreme
cases of an absent CS and a paired one.

In the pairing experiment, both CS and CXT are presented in phase 1 and
associated to US in phase 2, during 11 trials. Then, the network
prediction is tested in a trial with only the sensory CS and a trial
with only the context CXT. The procedure is exactly the same in the
unpairing experiment, except that the level of activation of the sensory
CS is randomly varied along the 11 trials. Figure 5 reports prediction
by the network in the pairing experiment. Pairing under normal
conditions is identical to fear conditioning as described previously
(Figures 5A,B). Figure 5C shows network prediction, i.e., CeLOn ﬁring
rate, following con- ditioning, if only the tone CS (blue bar) or only
the context (green

FIGURE 5 | (A–C) Pairing experiment (see text for details). (D–F)
Pairing experiment with increased ACh level. (B,E) CeLOn activity
increases, and correctly predicts US arrival after a few trials in both
experiments. (A) LA (blue triangles) and BAf (blue squares) activities
increase during training. BAe activities (green squares) weakly decrease
due to inhibition. Starting from trial 6, BAf activities are weakly
decreasing due to the reduction of uncertainty, which reduces ACh. (C)
CeLOn activity after learning, when only the tone CS (blue bar) or only
the context (green

bar) is presented. Prediction is higher for the tone CS, while
context-based prediction does not differ much from baseline level rate
taken at trial 1, when no CS or context are presented). (D) ACh increase
causes BAf activities to increase faster than LA activities. (F) After
learning, CeLOn activity is higher for context-based prediction, and
tone-based prediction only shows a weak difference from baseline level.
ACh increase causes US to be associated with context instead of CS in
the pairing experiment.

(ﬁring

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

9

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

bar) is presented. Context-based prediction does not diﬀer much from
baseline ﬁring rate, whereas tone-based prediction is higher. In Figures
5D–F, we report the same experiment with higher level of ACh, by
artiﬁcially maintaining it to 3.0, which represents around twice the
usual level in this experiment. As Figure 5E shows, CeLOn activity is
successfully predicting US arrival. It can be observed in Figure 5D that
contrarily to normal pairing where learning is distributed between LA
and BAf, here BAf is mainly responsible for this prediction. Figure 5F
shows that after learn- ing, contrarily to normal pairing, tone-based
prediction does not diﬀer much from baseline, whereas context-based
prediction is more salient. Our results reproduce (Calandreau et al.,
2006) results on the pairing experiment.

In Figure 6, the network is observed during the unpair- ing experiment,
under normal (A–C) and depleted (D–F) ACh

levels. As seen in Figure 6B, the network correctly performs
conditioning, mostly based on BAf activities, while LA activities do not
increase much during learning (Figure 6A). As a result, tone CS
associative strength does not diﬀer from baseline after learning, while
context-based prediction is high (Figure 6A). The network mainly learns
to associate the context with the US in the unpairing experiment under
normal ACh level. Tested with depleted ACh level (ACh maintained to 0.5%
of the baseline level during learning), the opposite association is
observed. Figure 6E shows that the network is successfully predicting
the US when the tone CS is suﬃciently salient, and not for lower
salience. Dur- ing learning, activities in LA are increasing quicker
than in BAf (Figure 6D). When the tone CS is less salient, both are
decreas- ing. This shows that learning is essentially based on the tone
CS. Indeed, Figure 6E shows that context-based CeLOn prediction

FIGURE 6 | (A–C) Unpairing experiment (cf. text for details). (D–F)
Unpairing experiment with depleted ACh level. (A) LA activity (blue
triangles) weakly increases when CS is high, whereas BAf activity (blue
squares) strongly increases. BAe activity decreases due to BAf
inhibition. (B) CeLOn activity (blue circles) increases due to BAf
increase and predicts US arrival after learning. (C) Tone CS alone does
not elicit a strong fear response after learning (blue bar), while
context does (green bar). (D) With ACh depletion, the network is more
inﬂuenced by CS

salience. Activities in both LA and BAf increase during training,
comparatively more in LA than in BAf. (E) CeLOn activity increases
during training, and is correctly predicting US at the end of training
when the tone CS is salient. (F) After learning, fear response is strong
when CS is presented alone, but not when the context is presented alone.
ACh depletion causes US to be associated with CS instead of context in
the unpairing experiment. Green squares, BAe neurons activity; Green
circles, CeLOff neurons activity.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

10

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

does not really diﬀer from baseline level, contrarily to tone-based
response which is close to one. In short, in both pairing and unpairing
experiments, the network is reproducing (Calandreau et al., 2006)’s
results on choosing between sensory or contextual cues, depending on CS
accuracy and ACh level.

4.  Discussion

Pavlovian conditioning is a learning paradigm often considered in
experimental and modeling works because it is easy to observe and to
control and involves well-identiﬁed cerebral structures. In the case of
somatomotor associations with aversive US and short time interval like
eyeblink conditioning, the cerebellum has been identiﬁed as the major
locus of associative learning (Steinmetz, 2000) and the hippocampus has
been shown to provide contex- tual information (Carretero-Guillén et
al., 2013). For stronger US and longer CS-US interval, like in fear
conditioning, the amyg- dala has been shown to perform CS-US
association, with a variety of neuronal populations as reported above.

The model proposed in this paper, while simple, allowed us to
investigate and identify the precise roles of the main nuclei of the
amygdala, with a particular emphasis on their diﬀerentiation relatively
to MTL and mPFC structures. All the results reported in this paper have
been produced by a simple model using point- neurons and rate activation
function, with similar equations and parameters for every amygdalar
populations. This indicates that properties observed in conditioning
protocols emerge from con- nections and interactions between multiple
populations, rather than from complex representations within a
population. Experi- ments carried out with the model were the
opportunity to revisit and interpret a series of experiments in the
literature, related to fear learning, extinction, fear response and
neuromodulation. These elements can also be gathered in a new
interpretation of pavlovian conditioning within MTL and its main
information ﬂows.

4.1. Complementary Fear Learning in LA and BAf In the model, neurons in
LA and BAf receive external inputs, respectively from the sensory cortex
and the hippocampus and learn to anticipate fear. The experiments we
have driven have been compared to experiments reported in Herry et
al. (2008) and in modeling works by Vlachos et al. (2011). In contrast
to this latter study, our model is not only focusing on BA and can be
the basis for discussing precisely the respective roles of LA and BAf in
fear learning. A strong idea in this regard is to go beyond the impact
of external inputs on LA and BAf and to inte- grate internal relations
within the amygdala from LA to BAf. In the pairing experiment,
Calandreau et al. (2006) states that the prediction is based on sensory
inputs rather than on contex- tual ones. One could argue that, because
the experiment is using a quite salient tone, learning the tone is
easier. As an alterna- tive but not contradictory explanation, our model
explains this bias toward sensory rules in the pairing experiment with
normal ACh level because both LA and BAf receive sensory informa- tion
(LA directly from the cortex and BAf indirectly from LA) whereas only
BAf can predict contextual rules. Tone-based pre- dictions will
consequently occur both in LA and BAf and will overcome contextual
learning, except for stronger levels of ACh.

This interpretation is also consistent with experiments carried out in
Herry et al. (2008), involving sensory inputs (simple tones) and
reporting activation of BAf neurons.

Results proposed here have been obtained with non-plastic connections
from LA to BAf. In experiments non-reported here, identical results were
obtained, applying the learning rule on LA- BAf connections. This
suggests that LA-BAf learning is not nec- essary for the diﬀerent
experiments tested here. One hypothesis is that this would be necessary
for more precise discrimination, like modulating a speciﬁc rule if the
strength of the US changes in speciﬁc contexts.

One strong feature of our model is that learning is distributed between
LA and BAf under normal condition, which is consistent with ﬁndings
(Anglada-Figueroa and Quirk, 2005) that a lesion of BA after training
impairs fear conditioning (because, we argue, a part of the memory trace
is in BA), whereas a lesion of BA prior to conditioning does not
(because all the memory traces are in LA). Under this view, our model is
predicting that a lesion of BA after training under ACh depletion should
not, or signiﬁcatively less, impair fear acquisition.

4.2. BAe Neurons Perform Extinction Learning In the model, neurons in
BAe learn to extinguish fear responses, based on inputs from IL. Our
experiments nicely reproduce the ﬁnding that extinction is not
forgetting, reporting activities in LA during extinction (Repa et al.,
2001; Maren, 2005) and immediate recovery of previous fear response
(Herry et al., 2008).

Because our model is mainly a model of the amygdala, we did not
implement how an extinction situation is detected in IL. Instead, IL
simply transmits a signal indicating an extinction con- text. In a more
realistic approach, this signal should be sent when the recent history
contains too many errors to be compatible with the estimated uncertainty
of the rule. This challenging problem is the topic of ongoing works.

For the moment, in our model, extinction learning takes place only in
BAe. It could be also considered, in accordance with results reported in
Anglada-Figueroa and Quirk (2005), that extinction learning could
exclusively take place in IL, and no learning would occur in BAe, only
relaying IL activity to inactivate fear neurons and activate CeLOﬀ. This
seems to us unlikely because as shown in Herry et al. (2008),
inactivation of BA completely prevents extinction. After reactivation,
animals still exhibit high freezing levels, but are able to learn
extinction normally. This implies that no extinction learning occurred
in IL while BA was inactive, and seems more in favor of extinction
learning taking place in BA, driven by IL indicating or not an
extinction context. Moreover, extinction learning is taking more time
than acquisition and fear neurons start to decrease their activity after
the activity of extinction neurons starts to increase (Herry et al.,
2008). Our model reproduces these ﬁndings (cf. Figure 3C) and explains
these phenomena by fear neurons still predicting US and keeping
extinction learning slow in the ﬁrst tri- als. Yet this phenomenon would
not occur if extinction learning only takes place in IL. Another
explanation, non-contradictory with the ﬁrst one, is that animals need
ﬁrst to learn the extinction context, to diﬀerentiate extinction from a
stochastic rule, before starting to learn extinction. Yet, both
hypotheses are in favor of having an extinction learning in BAe.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

11

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

Other authors encompass the role of non-amygdalar learn- ing in
contextual extinction. Particularly, Anglada-Figueroa and Quirk (2005)
report that rats with BA lesions show nor- mal extinction learning. This
evidence is nicely reproduced by Moustafa et al. (2013) in his
two-process model about the involvement of the hippocampus in fear
conditioning. This model incorporates the same regions as in our model,
but extinc- tion is implemented with a direct projection from IL to
inter- calated cells (ITC), which in turn inhibit CeM, with no need for
extinction learning in the amygdala. In a more extensive series of
experiments, Laurent et al. (2008) reports that rats with BA lesions or
BA learning impairment can indeed extinguish a fear response, but do not
show extinction if tested the day after, while normal rats do. Both
views can be reconciled by consid- ering the involvement of these two
pathways at two diﬀerent time scales (Pauli et al., 2011). The
IL-ITC-CeM pathway would be responsible for a rapid ﬂexible learning of
extinction whereas the IL-BAe-CeLOﬀ-CeM pathway would perform slow
learning and long-term storage. As discussed in Section 4.3, this is a
good motivation for reconsidering the role of ITC in our model.

4.3. CeLOn Neurons Prepare the Response of the Central Nucleus The
output of the network is integrated in two diﬀerent popu- lations of
CeLOn and CeLOﬀ neurons, as described in Ciocchi et al. (2010) and
reported to integrate the contribution of LA and BA populations in a
unique behavioral response. Our model does not assume a similar role for
CeLOn and CeLOﬀ. Only CeLOn activity is taken as the output of the
model, i.e., we consider that CeLOn activity represents the US
prediction of our network. CeLOﬀ will inﬂuence this prediction by
inhibiting it, but is not a direct output of our model. This is
consistent with biological data reported in Ciocchi et al. (2010),
showing that whereas both CeLOn and CeLOﬀ project to medial CeA, CeLOn
is responsi- ble for the spontaneous burst in medial CeA neurons
previous to US arrival, while CeLOﬀ has a more tonic eﬀect. This allows
us to explain why it is reported that fear neurons in LA are still ﬁr-
ing during extinction (Repa et al., 2001; Maren, 2005): our model
proposes that their eﬀect on CeLOn is extinguished by CeLOﬀ inhibition,
sustained by BAe.

CeLOﬀ was chosen as the unique locus of inhibition in the model for the
sake of simplicity. A more realistic implementation of inhibition of the
fear response during extinction would have to consider the respective
roles of CeLOﬀ and ITC in inhibiting the fear response in CeM, as we
intend to do in future works (Amano et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2013).
Another simpliﬁcation in our model is the absence of plasticity in CeA,
even if studies are showing that there is actually plasticity,
especially in CeL (Pare et al., 2004). According to our experience, this
plasticity should not play a major role in the extinction/renewal or
pairing/unpairing exper- iments. In contrast, this learning may be
important to associate direct signals from thalamus to CeA, which is not
critical for solving the experiments described here. Such a case is
reported in Yu and Dayan (2005), while detecting unknown uncertainty
(the rule is not valid, not because of stochasticity but because the
rule has changed). In order to ﬁnd rapidly a new valid rule, the authors
explain that it is more eﬃcient to rely on basic cues

from the thalamus rather than on high level cues from the cor- tex,
possibly elaborated for the previous rule. The authors suggest that
noradrenergic modulation could help biasing the balance between thalamic
and cortical inputs to the amygdala, as it is also described in Johnson
et al. (2011).

Another possible role for plasticity in CeA could be to learn to weigh
multiple aﬀerences to CeL, coming from LA, BA but also IL, to trigger an
adapted response, even in complex situa- tions requiring precise
discrimination or allowing to generalize behavior (Ciocchi et al.,
2010). Here also, this could be the topic of future works, including the
design of more complex situations.

4.4. Impact of Neuromodulation on Learning From a physiological point of
view, ACh has been reported to impact neuronal processing by enhancing
signal to noise ratio (SNR) in the cortex (Pauli and O’Reilly, 2008),
the hippocampus (Hasselmo, 2006) and the basal nucleus of the amygdala
(Unal et al., 2015). From a functional point of view, ACh has been pro-
posed to signal known uncertainty (stochasticity) (Yu and Dayan, 2005).

In our model, the impact of ACh is implemented by increasing responses
in BA populations proportionally to their levels of acti- vation. On the
one hand, this eﬀect actually increases SNR in BA. On the other hand, it
favors contextual hippocampal input in BA as compared to learning on
sensory cues in LA, which is appro- priate in case of known uncertainty.
Indeed, in our study adapted from Calandreau et al. (2006), whereas the
pairing experiments naturally favor learning on sensory cues in LA, in
the unpair- ing experiments, the stochasticity of the sensory rule
provokes an increase in ACh level and results in a quicker learning in
BA than in LA. As a result, the contextual rule is learnt instead of the
sensory rule.

The main diﬀerence between experiments in Calandreau et al. (2006) and
in our model is the region where ACh levels are modiﬁed (respectively in
the hippocampus and in the amyg- dala). Nevertheless, in both cases, ACh
depletion is impairing the same functional pathway concerned with
contextual learning and implicitly favors learning on sensory cues. As a
prediction, we postulate that performing the same experiments as in
Calandreau et al. (2006) with modiﬁed ACh levels in BA should deliver
sim- ilar results, thus comforting this interpretation. This prediction
is at some extent supported by McIntyre et al. (2003) reporting a
positive correlation between amygadalar ACh and performance in a
hippocampus dependent task.

Variation of ACh level in BA has a similar impact on the com- petition
between sensory-based fear prediction and contextual fear extinction. In
particular, Schroeder and Packard (2004) show a facilitating eﬀect of
intra-amygdalar injection of an ACh agonist in contextual extinction.
Prado-Alcalá et al. (1994) report rever- sal of contextual extinction
with ACh antagonist injection. Our model reproduces this reversal with
ACh depletion after extinc- tion learning (Figures 4G,H). These ﬁndings
and those reported just above on contextual vs. sensory learning,
highlight the cen- tral role of ACh in modulating the diﬀerent amygdalar
pathways. In both cases, by enhancing neuronal activity in BA, increased
ACh levels promote alternative solutions to fear response based on
sensory cues.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

12

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

4.5. Pavlovian Learning within MTL This integrated view of the amygdala
is also a systemic view of pavlovian conditioning in the amygdala in
interaction with other cerebral structures. In the aim of learning CS-US
associations, at the lowest level of complexity, features characterizing
the CS and the US can be simply given by the thalamus and the sen- sory
cortex. In this case, and as it has already been proposed by many models
based on the Rescorla-Wagner rule (Rescorla and Wagner, 1972), LA can
extract these features by a competitive learning and predict US
eﬃciently. It can also target CeA directly to produce the corresponding
pavlovian responses. In the view emerging from our model, BA is involved
as soon as the situa- tion goes beyond this standard case and makes the
decision from the current evaluation of LA but also from the integration
of cues from other cerebral structures.

On the one hand, this is the case when the CS is more com- plex than in
the standard case. The complexity can be in space: the CS can integrate
contextual information as we have experi- mented here or it can
correspond to the conﬁgural combination of stimuli not present in the
cortical representation, as it is for example discussed in O’Reilly and
Rudy (2001); in both cases, the hippocampus can learn by heart this
conﬁguration and activate BA fear-neurons. In the case of conﬁgural
representation that our model could also consider in future work, a
subsequent consoli- dation between the hippocampus and the cortex might
endow the latter with the needed representation (McClelland et al.,
1995); subsequently and as an ultimate goal of pavlovian learning, LA
could integrate the association in the scheme of a new simple sen- sory
rule involving cues from the cortex, instead of a speciﬁc con- text from
the hippocampus. The complexity can also be in time: a too long CS is
extended by a sustained activity in PL, sent to BA as reported in
Pendyam et al. (2013); similarly, a delayed CS as con- sidered in
Calandreau et al. (2006) might also be represented by a

working memory. Extending our model to prefrontal structures would be
necessary to extend pavlovian learning to such temporal eﬀect.

On the other hand, the case for more complex association also arises
when the CS-US association changes in time, which is not rare in our
stochastic and dynamic world. We have evoked here the case of contextual
extinction where a rule valid at a certain time becomes suddenly
extinguished in another context. We have argued that IL has all the
information and functional character- istics to build this history in a
working memory and to act on BA accordingly through extinction neurons.
The cases where the expected US doesn’t arrive because the association
is more com- plex than expected have to be distinguished from the cases
where the US doesn’t arrive because the rule is simply stochastic and
doesn’t apply from time to time, just by chance. In this case, there is
no concrete new rule to learn, but it must be considered that speciﬁc
rules involving contextual information should be prob- ably more
reliable than general rules based on the presence of sensory cues. This
is implemented in our model by the modu- latory eﬀect of ACh, as an
incitation for preferring contextual rules in BA instead of general
rules in LA. ACh release might also result in provoking the learning of
such contextual rules in the hippocampus.

In conclusion, this systemic view of the amygdala is also a dynamic view
of our memory system, proposing in accordance to many other authors and
experiments (McClelland et al., 1995; Holland and Gallagher, 1999; Pauli
et al., 2011) that learning in one structure can subsequently improve
the memorization pro- cess in another structure. An original
interpretation of our study proposes such a role for pavlovian
conditioning within the MTL, with learning in amygdalar nuclei fed by
inputs from the cortex and the hippocampus and enriching subsequently
memories in these structures.

References

Amano, T., Unal, C. T., and Paré, D. (2010). Synaptic correlates of fear
extinction

in the amygdala. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 489–494. doi: 10.1038/nn.2499

Anglada-Figueroa, D., and Quirk, G. J. (2005). Lesions of the basal
amygdala block expression of conditioned fear but not extinction. J.
Neurosci. 25, 9680–9685. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2600-05.2005

Armony, J. L., Servan-Schreiber, D., Cohen, J. D., and LeDoux, J. E.
(1997). Com- putational modeling of emotion: explorations through the
anatomy and phys- iology of fear conditioning. Trends Cogn. Sci. 1,
28–34. doi: 10.1016/S1364- 6613(97)01007-3

Balleine, B. W., and Killcross, S. (2006).

incentive processing: an integrated view of amygdala function. Trends
Neurosci. 29, 272–279. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2006.03.002

Parallel

Biedenkapp, J. C., and Rudy, J. W. (2009). Hippocampal and
extrahippocampal systems compete for control of contextual fear: role of
ventral subiculum and amygdala. Learn. Mem. 16, 38–45. doi:
10.1101/lm.1099109 Burgos-Robles, A., Vidal-Gonzalez, I., and Quirk, G.
J. (2009).

Sustained conditioned responses in prelimbic prefrontal neurons are
correlated with fear expression and extinction failure. J. Neurosci. 29,
8474–8482. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0378-09.2009

Calandreau, L., Triﬁlieﬀ, P., Mons, N., Costes, L., Marien, M.,
Marighetto, A., et al. (2006). Extracellular hippocampal acetylcholine
level controls amygdala func- tion and promotes adaptive conditioned
emotional response. J. Neurosci. 26, 13556–13566. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3713-06.2006

Cardinal, R. N., Parkinson, J. A., Hall, J., and Everitt, B. J. (2002).
Emotion and motivation: the role of the amygdala, ventral striatum, and
prefrontal cortex. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 26, 321–352. doi:
10.1016/S0149-7634(02)00007-6 Carretero-Guillén, A., Pacheco-Calderón,
R., Delgado-García, J. M., and Gruart, A. (2013). Involvement of
hippocampal inputs and intrinsic circuit in the acqui- sition of context
and cues during classical conditioning in behaving rabbits. Cereb.
Cortex. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht321. [Epub ahead of print].

Ciocchi, S., Herry, C., Grenier, F., Wolﬀ, S. B. E., Letzkus, J. J.,
Vlachos, I., et al. (2010). Encoding of conditioned fear in central
amygdala inhibitory circuits. Nature 468, 277–282. doi:
10.1038/nature09559

Eichenbaum, H., Sauvage, M., Fortin, N., Komorowski, R., and Lipton, P.
Towards a functional organization of episodic memory in the Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 36, 1597–1608. doi:

temporal

(2012). medial 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.07.006 (2000).

lobe.

fear, gestalt memories, and the hip- Behav. Brain Res. 110, 73–81. doi:
10.1016/S0166-4328(99)

Contextual

Fanselow, M. pocampus. 00186-2

Goosens, K. A., and Maren, S. (2001). Contextual and auditory fear
conditioning are mediated by the lateral, basal, and central amygdaloid
nuclei in rats. Learn. Mem. 8, 148–155. doi: 10.1101/lm.37601

Hasselmo, M. E. (2006). The role of acetylcholine in learning and
memory. Curr.

Opin. Neurobiol. 16, 710–715. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2006.09.002

Herry, C., Ciocchi, S., Senn, V., Demmou, L., Muller, C., and Luthi, A.
(2008). Switching on and oﬀ fear by distinct neuronal circuits. Nature
454, 600–606. doi: 10.1038/nature07166

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

13

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41

Carrere and Alexandre

A pavlovian model of the amygdala

Holland, P. C., and Gallagher, M. (1999). Amygdala circuitry in
attentional and representational processes. Trends Cogn. Sci. 3, 65–73.
doi: 10.1016/S1364- 6613(98)01271-6

Johnson, L. R., Hou, M., Prager, E. M., and LeDoux, J. E. (2011).
Regulation of the fear network by mediators of stress: norepinephrine
alters the balance between cortical and subcortical aﬀerent excitation
of the lateral amygdala. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 5:23. doi:
10.3389/fnbeh.2011.00023

Kim, D., Paré, D., and Nair, S. S. (2013). Mechanisms contributing to
the induction and storage of Pavlovian fear memories in the lateral
amygdala. Learn. Mem. 20, 421–430. doi: 10.1101/lm.030262.113

Kruschke, J. K. (2001). Toward a uniﬁed model of attention in
associative learning.

J. Math. Psychol. 45, 812–863. doi: 10.1006/jmps.2000.1354

Laurent, V., Marchand, A. R., and Westbrook, R. F. (2008). The
basolateral amygdala is necessary for learning but not relearning
extinction of context conditioned fear. Learn. Mem. 15, 304–314. doi:
10.1101/lm.928208

Le Pelley, M. E. (2004). The role of associative history in models of
associative learning: a selective review and a hybrid model. Q. J. Exp.
Psychol. 57, 193–243. doi: 10.1080/02724990344000141

LeDoux,

J.  

(2007). 10.1016/j.cub.2007.08.005

The amygdala.

Curr. Biol. 17, R868–R874. doi:

Lee, S., Kim, S.-J., Kwon, O.-B., Lee, J. H., and Kim, J.-H. (2013).
Inhibitory net- works of the amygdala for emotional memory. Front.
Neural Circuits 7:129. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00129

Li, S. S., and McNally, G. P. (2014). The conditions that promote fear
learning: prediction error and Pavlovian fear conditioning. Neurobiol.
Learn. Mem. 108, 14–21. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.05.002

Li, G., Nair, S. S., and Quirk, G. J. (2009). A biologically realistic
network model of acquisition and extinction of conditioned fear
associations in lateral amygdala neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 101,
1629–1646. doi: 10.1152/jn.90765.2008

Mackintosh, N. J. (1975). A theory of attention: variations in the
associability of stimuli with reinforcement. Psychol. Rev. 82, 276–298.
doi: 10.1037/h0076778 Maren, S. (2005). Building and burying fear
memories in the brain. Neuroscientist

11, 89–99. doi: 10.1177/1073858404269232

McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., and O’Reilly, R. C. (1995). Why
there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and
neocortex: insights from the successes and failures of connectionist
models of learning and mem- ory. Psychol. Rev. 102, 419–457. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419

Pauli, W. M., Hazy, T. E., and O’Reilly, R. C. (2011). Expectancy,
ambiguity, and behavioral ﬂexibility: separable and complementary roles
of the orbital frontal cortex and amygdala in processing reward
expectancies. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 24, 351–366. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00155

Paz, R., and Paré, D. (2013). Physiological basis for emotional
modulation of memory circuits by the amygdala. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
23, 381–386. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2013.01.008

Pendyam, S., Bravo-Rivera, C., Burgos-Robles, A., Sotres-Bayon, F.,
Quirk, G. J., and Nair, S. S. (2013). Fear signaling in the
prelimbic-amygdala circuit: a com- putational modeling and recording
study. J. Neurophysiol. 110, 844–861. doi: 10.1152/jn.00961.2012

Prado-Alcalá, R. A., Haiek, M., Rivas, S., Roldan-Roldan, G., and
Quirarte, G. L. (1994). Reversal of extinction by scopolamine. Physiol.
Behav. 56, 27–30. doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(94)90257-7

Repa, J. C., Muller, J., Apergis, J., Desrochers, T. M., Zhou, Y., and
LeDoux, J. E. (2001). Two diﬀerent lateral amygdala cell populations
contribute to the initiation and storage of memory. Nat. Neurosci. 4,
724–731. doi: 10.1038/89512 Rescorla, R., and Wagner, A. (1972). “A
theory of pavlovian conditioning: vari- ations in the eﬀectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement,” in Classi- cal Conditioning II:
Current Research and Theory, (New York, NY: Appleton Century Crofts),
64–99.

Rougier, N. P., and Fix, J. (2012). DANA: Distributed (asynchronous)
Numerical and Adaptive modelling framework. Netw. Comput. Neural Syst.
23, 237–253. doi: 10.3109/0954898X.2012.721573

Schmajuk, N. A., and DiCarlo, J. J. (1992). conditioning, and
hippocampal function. 10.1037/0033-295X.99.2.268

Stimulus conﬁguration, classical Psychol. Rev. 99, 268–305. doi:

Schroeder, J. P., and Packard, M. G. (2004). Facilitation of memory for
extinc- tion of drug-induced conditioned reward: role of amygdala and
acetylcholine. Learn. Mem. 11, 641–647. doi: 10.1101/lm.78504

Sierra-Mercado, D., Padilla-Coreano, N., and Quirk, G. J. (2011).
Dissocia- ble roles of prelimbic and infralimbic cortices, ventral
hippocampus, and basolateral amygdala in the expression and extinction
of conditioned fear. Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 529–538. doi:
10.1038/npp.2010.184

Steinmetz, J. E. (2000). Brain substrates of classical eyeblink
conditioning: a highly localized but also distributed system. Behav.
Brain Res. 110, 13–24. doi: 10.1016/S0166-4328(99)00181-3

McGaugh, J. L. (2004). The amygdala modulates the consolidation of memo-
ries of emotionally arousing experiences. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 1–28.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144157

Unal, C. T., Pare, D., and Zaborszky, L. (2015). Impact of basal
forebrain cholin- J. Neurosci. 35, 853–863. doi:

ergic inputs on basolateral amygdala neurons.
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2706-14.2015

McIntyre, C. K., Marriott, L. K., and Gold, P. E. (2003). Cooperation
between memory systems: acetylcholine release in the amygdala correlates
positively with performance on a hippocampus-dependent task. Behav.
Neurosci. 117, 320–326. doi: 10.1037/0735-7044.117.2.320

Vlachos, I., Herry, C., Lüthi, A., Aertsen, A., and Kumar, A. (2011).
Context- dependent encoding of fear and extinction memories in a
large-scale net- work model of the basal amygdala. PLoS Comput. Biol.
7:e1001104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001104

Meeter, M., Myers, C. E., and Gluck, M. A. (2005). Integrating
incremental learn- ing and episodic memory models of the hippocampal
region. Psychol. Rev. 112, 560–585. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.112.3.560

Wallis, J. D. (2007). Orbitofrontal cortex and its contribution to
decision-making. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30, 31–56. doi:
10.1146/annurev.neuro.30.051606.094334 Yu, A. J., and Dayan, P. (2005).
Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention.

Moustafa, A. A., Gilbertson, M. W., Orr, S. P., Herzallah, M. M.,
Servatius, R. J., and Myers, C. E. (2013). A model of
amygdala–hippocampal–prefrontal inter- action in fear conditioning and
extinction in animals. Brain Cogn. 81, 29–43. doi:
10.1016/j.bandc.2012.10.005

O’Reilly, R. C., and Rudy, J. W. (2001). Conjunctive representations in
learning and memory: principles of cortical and hippocampal function.
Psychol. Rev. 108, 311–345. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.108.2.311

Pare, D., Quirk, G. J., and Ledoux, J. E. (2004). New vistas on amygdala
networks

in conditioned fear. J. Neurophysiol. 92, 1–9. doi:
10.1152/jn.00153.2004

Pauli, W. M., and O’Reilly, R. C. (2008). Attentional control of
associative learning–a possible role of the central cholinergic system.
Brain Res. 1202, 43–53. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.06.097

Neuron 46, 681–692. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.026

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
con- ducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2015 Carrere and Alexandre. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution and reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and
that the original publication in this jour- nal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

14

March 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 41


