On the design of text editors
Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier. On the design of text editors. 2020. ￿hal-03018466￿

HAL Id: hal-03018466

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03018466

Preprint submitted on 22 Nov 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

On the design of text editors

Nicolas P. Rougier

Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest

Bordeaux, France

Nicolas.Rougier@gmail.com

Figure 1: GNU Emacs screenshots with hacked settings.

ABSTRACT
Code editors are written by and for developers. They come with a
large set of default and implicit choices in terms of layout, typog-
raphy, colorization and interaction that hardly change from one
editor to the other. It is not clear if these implicit choices derive
from the ignorance of alternatives or if they derive from developers’
habits, reproducing what they are used to. The goal of this article
is to characterize these implicit choices and to illustrate what are
alternatives, without prescribing one or the other.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → HCI theory, concepts and
models; Interaction design theory, concepts and paradigms;
Text input.

KEYWORDS
text, code, edition, design, color, typography, minimal

1 INTRODUCTION
Text (or code) editors are computer programs used for editing plain
text. The first rudimentary text editor (QED) was released in 1965
[6, 16], soon followed by EDIT [4]. Since then, a plethora of text
editors have been written, such as GNU Emacs [18] (1976) and
vi/vim [19] (1976), for the oldest (and still actively developed), or
Atom (2014) and Sublime Text (2008), for the more recent ones.
Each editor offers some specific features (e.g. modal editing, syntax

2020-09-03 11:28. Page 1 of 1–5.

colorization, code folding, plugins, etc.) that is supposed to differ-
entiate it from the others at time of release. There exists however
one common trait for virtually all of text editors: they are written
by and for developers. Consequently, design is generally not the
primary concern and the final product does not usually enforce
best recommendations in terms of appearance, interface design
or even user interaction. The most striking example is certainly
the syntax colorization that seems to go against every good de-
sign principles in a majority of text editors and the motto guiding
design could be summarized by “Let’s add more colors” (using regex).

More generally, modern text editors comes with a large set of default
and implicit choices that hardly change from one editor to the other.
To take only one example, most editors (that I know) consider
that there exists only two font weights (regular and bold): you can
choose the regular font but rarely can you choose the boldness of
the bold one. Consequently, if you choose a light or thin weight for
the regular font, the difference with the bold font is dramatically
accentuated. It is not clear to me if these implicit choices derive
from the ignorance of alternatives or if they derive from developers’
habits, reproducing what they are used to. The goal of this article is
thus to characterized these implicit choices and to illustrate what
are the alternatives. However, I do not recommend any specific
alternative since this would require a user study that has yet to be
done [17]. The goal is rather is to make the developer aware of the
alternatives and to let her experiment.

Note: In this landscape, GNU Emacs and vi (or VIM) are very spe-
cific because they’re highly hackable such that the advanced user

Nicolas P. Rougier

any margins as illustrated on figure 3A. While it is not conceivable
to have a book or a PDF documents without margins, it is somehow
considered perfectly normal to not have margins for a code editor
(and for a terminal as well on that matter). It is even more surprising
considering the recommendations that were made as early as 1986
by Van Nes [22]. Nonetheless, only a handful of modern editors
offers the possibility to define margins. One possible explanation
might be historical. Forty years ago, the standard vt100 terminal
offered only a resolution of 80×24 characters and we could easily
imagine that with such limited display, margins were out of the
question. Today (2020), most screens have a much larger capability
and it is thus difficult to understand why, if not habits, margins
are still not an option. This would ease the reading (see 3B) and
the same is true for line spacing that is generally set to its minimal
value without the possibility to modify it while it would ease the
reading even more.

Furthermore, it seems that the default shape of the window in single
window mode has inherited the 3/1 ratio from the vt100 console
and the default window tends to be larger than tall. This is again
a peculiar choice considering that code is mostly made of short
lines (best practices recommend lines length between 72 and 90
characters, 80 being an heritage of IBM punch cards, see [12] for a
review) that are mostly written on the left on the window. It would
thus make sense to have taller windows as illustrated on figure 3C.
Of course, this shape can be modified from the window manager or
the settings, but there could be an option, for example, to enforce a
fixed ratio of 1/√

2 (ISO 216, see figure 1).

3 TYPOGRAPHY
Typography is the poor relation of code edition [14]. It is as if
typography recommendations had been frozen sometime during
the eighties and nothing has ever changed since then. Typography
in most code editors can be summarized as Use only monospaced
fonts with two weights (regular & bold) and two slants (normal &
italic). However, digital typography has changed a lot since the
eighties [2, 3] and, for example, most typefaces come in several
weight variations, ranging from ultra thin to ultra black such that
it is possible to define several couples. For example, in the case of
Roboto Mono, we can use thin, light, regular, medium or bold:

Furthermore, with the advent variable fonts, we can consider several
alternatives. Variable fonts have been introduced in version 1.8 of
the OpenType font format specification. This new type of font
includes (in a single file) multiple variations over one or several
axis such as weight, width, optical size, slant etc and makes it
possible to interpolate between these variations. For the end-user,
this means she can precisely define the different typeface she wants
to use. For a text editor, this means it is possible to have context
dependent and dynamic font variations. For example, it is possible
to have subtle weight variations of a text depending whether text
is light text over a dark background or the opposite (think about

2020-09-03 11:28. Page 2 of 1–5.

Figure 2: Default layout found in several modern editors

can configure them to their exact liking. The screenshots from the
teaser figure have been designed using GNU Emacs.

2 LAYOUT
Beyond the actual text editing area where one can edit a file, most
code editors comes with a number of additional features such as
tabs, status bar, console, file browser, minimap, etc. This list may
vary from one editor to the other, but it appears that there is a
set of minimal features that a modern text editor is expected to
offer. When these features are all active at once, this naturally and
drastically reduces the size of the main editing area as illustrated on
figure 2. More importantly, this clutters the space with secondary
and peripheral information that a user doesn’t look at or use very
often when writing code. For example, the file (or project) browser
is useful for giving an overview of a project or to select a specific
file. But a developer spends most of her time in the text editing
area and these peripheral information can be largely considered
as a distractor or lost space. This might be the reason why a lot of
editors allow to deactivate these components and some of them
even offer a distraction free or zen mode (natively or via plug-in)
where most of the peripheral information is actually hidden.

Figure 3: Influence of shape, margins and line spacing

If we now look closer at the single window mode (without any extra
features), it is striking to observe that there are generally hardly

Editing areaLine numbersGutterFile / ProjectBrowserTabsMinimapConsoleStatus barOS Window frametitleABCdefhello(name):print(f"Hello{name}!")defhello(name):print(f"Hello{name}!")defhello(name):print(f"Hello{name}!")defhello(name):print(f"Hello{name}!")On the design of text editors

Figure 4: A. Regular code display using syntax highlighting.
B. Alternative code display taking advantage of typography.

selected text). Since any font axis can be made variable this offers
a tremendous amount of possibility and probably a tremendous
amount of ways to abuse it.

Another typographical features that was hardly used until very
recently are ligatures, that is, the union of two or more glyphs into
a single glyph. The Hasklig font by Ian Tuomi (based on Source
Code Pro) is the first font to have taken advantage of ligatures and
adapted them to source code. For example, the usual notation for
greater than or equal in most programming languages is >= while
the mathematical notation is ≥. Ligatures can be used to actually
display the mathematical notation without changing the source
code. Today font families such as Fira Code, Monoid, Iosevska,
Inconsolata or JetBrains Mono all offers a various amount of such
code-oriented ligatures [10]. Even if this feature does not entirely
depend on the editor (editor must enforce ligature and the font must
possess ligatures), it is an aspect to be considered when selecting
the default font that is shipped with the editor. Note however that
some typographers do not recommend the usage of such code
ligature. Butterick [5] goes a bit further and explains that ligatures
in programming fonts are a terrible idea because i) they contradict
unicode and ii) they are guaranteed to be wrong sometimes.

Beyond eye-candy features, typography can also be exploited to
introduce some radical changes in code layout as shown on figure 4.
In this example, code and comments are separated in two distinct
columns using two different fonts (monospaced font (Fira Code) for
code and condensed font (Roboto Condensed) for comments). Com-
ments are placed on the left and the short title is made prominent
using larger and heavier font, enriched with contextual information
(branch and last commit). It is interesting to note that this alterna-
tive occupies the exact same physical space as a regular display. Of

2020-09-03 11:28. Page 3 of 1–5.

course, this mockup is only one possibilities among several alterna-
tives and most probably, there are better ways to highlight what
is deemed to be the important information in a source code. But I
think this simple example illustrates the fact that typography can
dramatically enhanced readability.

4 COLORIZATION
Syntax highlighting is pervasive and entrenched in virtually all code
editors. It aims at visually distinguishing elements of the source
code using different colors and/or typefaces. The origin can be
traced back to the patent filed in 1982 by Klock and Chodak [9]
about a syntax error correction method and apparatus (the first
color terminal dates back to 1979 [8]). This has been further refined
in 2009 with the concept of semantic highlighting [13] that uses
knowledge of the underlying language to provide a finer control
on how a given element should be highlighted. However, the ad-
vantages of syntax highlighting are far from being obvious. The
most recent study [7] could not find evidence in data that syntax
highlighting as used in Eclipse has a beneficial effect on program
comprehension for programming novices. To make things worse, it is
also not rare to have a Christmas tree effect resulting from an abuse
of syntax highlighting [24]. Consider for example figure 4A that
displays a code snippet using the default syntax highlighting of a
recent editor. Even though the code is rather small, syntax high-
lighting results in six different colors being used all over the source
code, making it difficult to assign a specific semantic to any given
color. The question, is thus, does it help the developer? According
to [1], using more visual variety when rendering methods substan-
tially reduces comprehension time of code features. The problem with
syntax highlighting is that it does not seem to be based on any
specific principles and derives from the possibility of identifying
code parts based on regular expressions, and the colorization of
such expression. But there are no scientific recommendation on
what to highlight or how to highlight. Only the solarized color
palette crafted by Ethan Schoonover seems to enforce some design
principles with reduced brightness contrast while retaining contrast-
ing hues for syntax highlighting readability even though the author
doesn’t prescribe how to apply it such color scheme.

There exist however alternate use of colorization where the se-
mantic of color is well defined. This is the case for multi-authored
document where each author is identified with a unique color. This
can be used during live editing such as notepads or post-edition
using tools such as git blame (for example). Another possibility
is to use colorization in order to show the modification history
of a document, using light tint for old modifications and heavier
tint for recent modifications. Wayne [23] goes a step further and
denounces the use of syntax highlighting since it is a waste of an
important information channel and suggest several alternative uses
of color, among which, rainbow parenthesis, context highlighting,
import highlighting, argument highlighting, type highlighting, etc.
Instead of syntax or semantic colorization based on content, a sim-
ple alternative would be to adapt colorization to the reader, taking
attentional constraints into account [11, 21]. For example, here is
the color scheme that has been used to design the mockup on figure
1 and which is based on the perception rather than the content:

/// Fast Inverse Square Root float Q\_rsqrt( float number ) { long i; float x2, y; const float threehalfs = 1.5F; x2 = number \* 0.5F; y = number; i = \* ( long \* ) &y /// Evil floating point bit level hacking i = 0x5f3759df - ( i >>> 1 ); /// !What the …? y = \* ( float \* ) &i y = y \* ( threehalfs - ( x2 \* y \* y ) ); /// 1st iteration /// y = y \* ( threehalfs - ( x2 \* y \* y ) ); /// 2nd iteration, this can be removed return y; } Fast Inverse Square Root float Q\_rsqrt ( float number )master branch, last modiﬁed yesterday{ long i; float x2, y; const float threehalfs = 1.5F; x2 = number \* 0.5F; y = number;Evil ﬂoating point bit level hacking i = \* ( long \* ) &yWhat the …? i = 0x5f3759df - ( i >>> 1 ); y = \* ( float \* ) &i1st iteration y = y \* ( threehalfs - ( x2 \* y \* y ) );2nd iteration, this can be removed/// y = y \* ( threehalfs - ( x2 \* y \* y ) ); return y;}ABCritical face is for information that requires immediate action. It
should be of high contrast when compared to other faces. This
can be done (for example) by setting an intense background
color, typically a shade of red. It must be used scarcely.

Popout face is used for information that needs attention. To
achieve such effect, the hue of the face has to be sufficiently
different from other faces such that it attracts attention through
the popout effect.

Strong face is used for information of a structural nature. It has
to be the same color as the default color and only the weight
differs by one level (e.g., light/regular or regular/bold). It is
generally used for titles, keywords, directory, etc.

Salient face is used for information that are important. To suggest
the information is of the same nature but important, the face
uses a different hue with approximately the same intensity as
the default face. This is typically used for links.

Faded face is for secondary information that is less important. It
is made by using the same hue as the default but with a lesser
intensity than the default. It can be used for comments, sec-
ondary information and also replace italic (which is generally
abused anyway).

Subtle face is used to suggest a physical area on the screen. It is
important to not disturb too strongly the reading of information
and this can be made by setting a very light background color
that is barely perceptible.

In fact, such cognitive colorization does not require any change
in syntax in highlighting engines. It only requires a restricted set
of colors and a careful selection of what information needs to be
salient, faded or strong.

5 USER INTERACTION
One feature shared by all text editors is the linear representation of
a text file and the use of scrolling to navigate forward or backward.
This has become a seemingly ubiquitous part of our user experience
and it seems difficult to imagine any alternative that nonetheless
exist. It is, for example, quite common to have a dedicated navi-
gation panel allowing to jump to a specific part of the code. This
panel can be built automatically (e.g. function, method, class, defini-
tion) or manually using bookmark inside a text file. However, these
navigation panels usually follows the linear structure of the code
(even though some may propose a sorted list) and do not process
semantically the content (when built automatically). These naviga-
tion panels are actually comparable to a table of content and this
suggests a code source could be considered as a book as it has been
proposed by Oman and Cook [14]. The author proposed to format
source code as if it was printed on a book, taking advantage of
typography, logical blocks separation and using the page paradigm
(instead of scroll). As explained by the author, the components of
a book (preface, table of contents, indices and pagination, chapters,
sections, paragraphs, sentences, punctuation, type style, and charac-
ter case) are all designed to facilitate rapid information access and
transfer. Such printed book paradigm has been hardly used in any
text editor but it is certainly a direction to explore further.

Nicolas P. Rougier

Figure 5: GNU Emacs with heavily modified settings enforc-
ing some of the alternatives presented in this article.

An important and critical aspect of interaction in a code editor is
(of course) the actual input of text and commands since coding
activity encompasses actual code writing but also code navigation.
In most modern editors, such inputs are carried out via the combi-
nation of keyboard and mouse while, in older editors such as Emacs
and vi, it is possible to issue text and commands from keyboard
only. For Emacs, this is made possible using the command-line that
is an integral part of Emacs and allow to type literal commands.
This has probably inspired the command palette that is now found
in modern editors. This command line is complemented by sev-
eral keybindings that may be global or specific to a given mode
(e.g. Python mode, Lisp mode, etc.) and any command can also be
bound to any key sequence (even very complex and long ones).
The philosophy of vi is quite different because it has adopted a
modal approach and operates in two modes: the insert mode where
keystrokes modify the document and the command mode where
keystrokes are interpreted as commands. Such modal feature has
been somehow killed by Tesler [20] who transformed the modal
Bravo editor into the modeless Gypsy editor during the seventies
and whose efficiency has been demonstrated [15]. This may very
well had a profound impact on the community because the only
surviving modal editor is actually vi and only the new kakoune
editor (kakoune.org) adopted a similar modal approach (using a
object + verb approach while vi uses verb + object). However, four

2020-09-03 11:28. Page 4 of 1–5.

Primary informationSecondary informationCommand line / Echo areaTransient informationMarginElegance is a consistent theme for GNU Emacs based on a restricted set of faces (x6) and strong design principles:Strong face is used for information of a structural nature.Critical face is for information that requires immediate action.Popout face is used for information that needs attention.Salient face is used for information that are important.Faded face is for secondary information that is less important.Subtle face is used to suggest a physical area on the screen.The frame has a 1/√2 ratio, possesses large margins, uses a larger line spacing and is organised around the header line displaying primary information on the left and secondary information on the right.Line spacingGNU Emacs — EleganceWidthHeighton Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.
2858372

[2] Charles Bigelow. 2020. The Font Wars, Part 1.

IEEE Annals of the History of

Computing 42, 1 (1 2020), 7–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/mahc.2020.2971202

[3] Charles Bigelow. 2020. The Font Wars, Part 2.

IEEE Annals of the History of

Computing 42, 1 (1 2020), 25–40. https://doi.org/10.1109/mahc.2020.2971745
[4] S. R. Bourne. 1971. A design for a text editor. Software: Practice and Experience 1,

1 (1 1971), 73–81. https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.4380010107

[5] Matthew Butterick. 2019. Practical Typography, second edition. online. https:

//practicaltypography.com/

[6] L. Peter Deutsch and Butler W. Lampson. 1967. An online editor. Commun. ACM

10, 12 (12 1967), 793–799. https://doi.org/10.1145/363848.363863

[7] Christoph Hannebauer, Marc Hesenius, and Volker Gruhn. 2018. Does syntax
highlighting help programming novices? Empirical Software Engineering 23, 5 (2
2018), 2795–2828. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-017-9579-0

IBM 3270 Information and Display System: Color and Programmed

[8] IBM 1979.

Symbol. IBM. GA33-3056-0 File No. 5360/5370/53/4300/8100-09.

[10] Matej Latin. 2020.

[9] Anita H. Klock and Jan B. Chodak. 1982. Syntax error correction method and appa-
ratus. https://patents.google.com/patent/US4617643A/en US Patent US4617643A.
5 monospaced fonts with cool coding ligatures. Blog
post. https://betterwebtype.com/articles/2020/02/13/5-monospaced-fonts-with-
cool-coding-ligatures/

[11] Lori McCay-Peet, Mounia Lalmas, and Vidhya Navalpakkam. 2012. On saliency,
affect and focused attention. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI '12. ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2207676.2207751

[12] Anuj Nanavati and Randolph Bias. 2005. Optimal Line Length in Reading–A

Literature Review. Visible Language (01 2005).

[13] David Nolden. 2009. From Syntax Highlighting to Semantic Highlighting. Blog
post. https://zwabel.wordpress.com/2009/01/08/c-ide-evolution-from-syntax-
highlighting-to-semantic-highlighting/

[14] Paul W. Oman and Curtis R. Cook. 1990. Typographic style is more than cosmetic.
Commun. ACM 33, 5 (5 1990), 506–520. https://doi.org/10.1145/78607.78611
[15] Merle F. Poller and Susan K. Garter. 1983. A comparative study of moded and
modeless text editing by experienced editor users. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI '83. ACM Press. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/800045.801603

[16] Dennis Ritchie. 2004. An incomplete history of the QED Text Editor. Blog post.

https://www.bell-labs.com/usr/dmr/www/qed.html

[17] Teresa L. Roberts and Thomas P. Moran. 1983. The evaluation of text editors:
methodology and empirical results. Commun. ACM 26, 4 (4 1983), 265–283.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2163.2164

[18] Richard M. Stallman. 1981. EMACS the extensible, customizable self-documenting
display editor. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 16, 6 (6 1981), 147–156. https://doi.org/10.
1145/872730.806466

[19] Sinclair Target. 2018. Where Vim Came From. Blog post. https://twobithistory.

org/2018/08/05/where-vim-came-from.html

[20] Larry Tesler. 2012. A personal history of modeless text editing and cut/copy-paste.

interactions 19, 4 (7 2012), 70. https://doi.org/10.1145/2212877.2212896

[21] Anne M. Treisman and Garry Gelade. 1980. A feature-integration theory of
attention. Cognitive Psychology 12, 1 (1 1980), 97–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0010-0285(80)90005-5

[22] F. L. Van Nes. 1986. Space, colour and typography on visual display terminals.
Behaviour & Information Technology 5, 2 (April 1986), 99–118. https://doi.org/10.
1080/01449298608914504

[23] Hillel Wayne. 2020. Syntax highlighting is a waste of an information channel.
Blog post. https://buttondown.email/hillelwayne/archive/46a17205-e38c-44f9-
b048-793c180c6e84

[24] Linus Åkesson. 2007. A case against syntax highlighting. Blog post. http:

//www.linusakesson.net/programming/syntaxhighlighting/

On the design of text editors

decades later, this efficiency might need to be re-evaluated, espe-
cially in light of challenges such as vimgolf (www.vimgolf.com)
that demonstrates how to perform complex and real-world code
transformation with only a few keystrokes. For example, let’s con-
sider the following text: “The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy
dog.” that we want to convert to “The quick lazy dog jumps over
the brown fox.” The actual sequence of vi keystrokes to transform
the first text into the second is 2wd2w3wPd3w6bep (2w: Move for-
ward two words – d2w: Delete two words – 3w: Move forward three
words – P: Paste the previously deleted text before cursor position
– d3w: Delete three words – 6b: Move back six words – e: Move to
the end of the current word – p: Paste the previously deleted text
after the cursor position). This keystroke sequence is of course a
bit cryptic for those not familiar with vi but it is nonetheless quite
efficient. No doubt that the casual user would not like to have to
learn such meta-language before being able to use the editor.

But let me remind you that users of code editors are not casual
users and such modal interface might need to be further exploited
in modern editors. Similarly, there are plenty of “old” concepts
that might be worth to be re-considered such as kill ring (extended
clipboard), recursive undo (possibility to undo an undo command),
rectangle selection, etc.

6 CONCLUSION
I’ve highlighted several implicit choices that are present in a num-
ber of both old and modern text editors and introduced several
alternatives that, I think, are worth to be explored and exploited
by future developers and designers. Several of these alternatives
have been actually introduced 30 years ago by Oman and Cook
[14] and I’ve mostly updated them in light of available technolo-
gies in 2020 and added new ones that were hardly imaginable in
1990. In the meantime, there are viable alternatives that are already
implemented in historic editors (vi and GNU Emacs) that may be
also worth to be reconsidered in the design of future code editors.
Overall, the sum of all these alternatives offer great possibilities to
enhance the user experience as illustrated in figure 5. This is not
a mockup but my actual GNU Emacs configuration that I use for
code, text, mail and agenda. Note that I’m not advocating for people
to use such setup, the goal is merely to highlight an example of a
radical design for a text editor that is perfectly usable according to
my daily and personal experience.

REFERENCES
[1] Dimitar Asenov, Otmar Hilliges, and Peter Müller. 2016. The Effect of Richer
Visualizations on Code Comprehension. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference

2020-09-03 11:28. Page 5 of 1–5.

