Lifelong learning challenges in the era of artificial
intelligence: a computational thinking perspective
Margarida Romero

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero. Lifelong learning challenges in the era of artificial intelligence: a computational
thinking perspective. IRMBAM 2024 - 13th International Research Meeting in Business and Manage-
ment, Ipag, Jul 2024, Nice, France. ￿hal-04593512￿

HAL Id: hal-04593512

https://hal.science/hal-04593512

Submitted on 29 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

https://irmbam2023.sciencesconf.org/resource/page/id/19

Lifelong learning challenges in the era of artificial intelligence: a
computational thinking perspective.

Margarida Romero
Université Côte d’Azur, France

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3356-8121

Abstract
intelligence (AI) has brought significant challenges to the
The rapid advancement of artificial
education and workforce skills required to take advantage of AI for human-AI collaboration in the
workplace. As AI continues to reshape industries and job markets, the need to define how AI literacy
can be considered in lifelong learning has become increasingly critical (Cetindamar et al., 2022;
Laupichler et al., 2022; Romero et al., 2023). Like any new technology, AI is the subject of both
hopes and fears, and what it entails today presents major challenges (Cugurullo & Acheampong,
2023; Villani et al., 2018). It also raises profound questions about our own humanity. Will the machine
surpass the intelligence of the humans who designed it? What will be the relationship between
so-called AI and our human intelligences? How could human-AI collaboration be regulated in a way
that serves the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)? This paper provides a review of the
challenges of lifelong learning in the era of AI from a computational thinking, critical thinking, and
creative competencies perspective, highlighting the implications for management and leadership in
organizations.

Keywords: artificial
learning.

intelligence, computational

thinking, creativity, critical

thinking,

lifelong

Introduction
Critical thinking is the most transversal competency for the education of the 21st century (Henriksen
et al., 2016; Romero, Lille, et al., 2017). Critical thinking is a human-specific competency that
requires sensible criteria based on a certain cultural context and interpersonal human relationships
(Romero, 2018; Sternberg & Halpern, 2020). Current AI tools require human effort to correct the bias
generated by the corpus of data in a way that permits the generation of information that is sensitive to
human qualities such as human rights and equality. In this paper, we provide a critical perspective of
artificial intelligence (AI) and discuss the importance of developing computational thinking (Lafuente
Martínez et al., 2022; Romero, Lepage, et al., 2017; Wing, 2006), creativity (Alexandre et al., 2022;
Henriksen et al., 2016; Isaac et al., 2022) and critical thinking (Lucas & Spencer, 2017; Sternberg &
Halpern, 2020) for supporting lifelong learning competencies for a better understanding and
developing the human-AI activities which can support the workforce in their professional but also
personal activities.

Human intelligence and artificial intelligence
We start by questioning the term "AI." Is the term "intelligence" relevant to computer applications

based on machine learning in particular? The aim of these algorithms is to develop systems capable of
capturing, processing, and reacting to (massive) information according to mechanisms that adapt to
the context or data to maximize the chances of achieving the objectives defined for the system
(Alexandre et al., 2021). This behavior, which may seem "intelligent", is created by human computer
scientists and has limitations related to the current human capacity to define efficient machine
learning systems and to the availability of massive data for the systems to adapt. It has been found that
these systems perform better than humans on specific tasks such as sound and image recognition or
tests such as the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) dataset (Tang & Kejriwal, 2023).
Does having a better reading test mean being able to understand, in a human and intelligent sense, the
text read? The statistical ability to identify answers may seem intelligent, but there is no evidence that
it is in the human critical and creative sense.
When, in the 1950s, Turing proposed a test based on a purely linguistic confrontation between a
human and another agent, which could be a machine or another human, he was not targeting the
intelligence of the machine, but the intelligence we might attribute to it. If the human judges that he is
interacting with a human agent and not a machine, the artificial intelligence test is considered
successful. And can we be satisfied with a good ability to respond to a human conversation to
consider a machine intelligent? (Alexandre et al., 2020).

Defining human intelligence

If we think of intelligence as the ability to learn (Beckmann, 2006) and learning as adaptation to
context (Piaget, 1953), it would be possible to consider systems that are able to improve their
adaptation to context from data collection and processing as intelligent. However, if we consider
intelligence as "the ability to solve problems or create solutions that are valuable in a given
socio-cultural context" (Gardner & Hatch, 1989, p. 5), under a diverse and dynamic approach, it is
more difficult to consider that a system, however adaptive and massively fed with data, can make
metacognitive judgements about its process and products in relation to a given socio-cultural context.
Gardner and Hatch's definition of human intelligence is very similar to that of creativity as the process
of designing a solution that is deemed new, innovative and relevant in relation to the specific context
of the problem situation (Romero, Lille, et al., 2017). Intelligence is therefore not the ability to
perform according to pre-established or predictable rules (including with adaptation mechanisms or
machine learning on data), but rather the ability to create something new by demonstrating a faculty
of
sensitivity and adaptation to the socio-cultural context and empathy on an intra- and
inter-psychological level with the different actors. This implies an understanding of human and
socio-historical nature in order to be able to judge one's own process and creation autonomously.

If we adopt this second critical and creative approach to intelligence, we should be cautious about
using the term AI for solutions that 'only' adapt according to predefined mechanisms that cannot
generate self-reflexive value judgments nor socio-cultural perspectives. Machine learning systems that
are labelled AI may be very good at basing themselves on very elaborate models fed with massive
data, but they are not "intelligent" in the critical and creative way that humans are. For example, my
phone can learn to recognize the words I dictate vocally, even if I have an accent, which it will infer
the more I use the system. However, to attribute real intelligence to a voice dictation is a subjective
projection, i.e., just a belief (Alexandre et al., 2023).

Developing critical thinking, creativity, and computational thinking

We can also question the "intelligence of AI" in relation to the critical thinking that characterizes
human intelligence. In the context of the #CoCreaTIC project, we define critical thinking as the ability
to develop independent critical thinking, which allows for the analysis of ideas, knowledge, and
processes in relation to a system of values and own judgements (Romero, Lille, et al., 2017). It is
responsible thinking that is based on criteria and sensitive to context and others. On the other hand, if
we think of algorithmic learning systems, and the politically incorrect results they have produced in
the face of images and textual responses that can be labelled as discriminatory, we should neither fear,
nor condemn, nor accept, this result, because it has no moral value. The most likely explanation is that
by 'learning' data from humans, the mechanism highlights racist and sexist elements; there is no value
system of its own. Here, this so-called AI does not have responsible thinking but exacerbates certain
deviations that humans are capable of producing but also of limiting and correcting by their criteria
and sensitivity to others.
Supporting critical thinking and creativity are essential for lifelong learning in the AI era as a way of
preparing citizens for the challenges of what is made possible by these algorithms. Digital literacy,
especially in critical, creative, and participatory approaches, can also help to develop a relationship
with computing that allows citizens to demystify AI, develop an ethical requirement, and adopt an
informed attitude in order to accept or not what will be used in their personal, social, or professional
activities. For acculturating lifelong learners to the fundamentals of AI, developing computational
thinking (Lafuente Martínez et al., 2022) is also a crucial aspect of lifelong learning. Computational
thinking involves problem-solving, critical thinking, and decision-making skills that are essential for
navigating the complex and dynamic world of AI. For these reasons,
the development of
computational thinking competency is also an asset that complements the need to develop critical and
creative thinking skills for understanding AI and developing human-AI collaboration in education and
the workplace.

The lever of computational thinking for supporting human-AI collaboration

In 2006, Wing described "computational thinking" as the ability to use computer processes to solve
problems in any domain. To develop it, learners (from kindergarten onwards, and at all ages) can
combine the learning of computational concepts and processes that are the subject of 'digital literacy'
(object, attribute, method, design pattern, etc.) with a creative problem-solving approach that uses
computational concepts and processes (Romero, Lepage, et al., 2017). Projects such as Class'Code in
France or CoCreaTic in Canada have developed resources and a community to support this approach,
in which it is not about learning 'coding' (in the sense of coding with a computer language) step by
step, but about solving problems creatively and in a way that is sensitive to the context of the problem.
In other words, going beyond coding allows us to anchor ourselves in a broader approach to creative
programming (Menon et al., 2019; Romero et al., 2016). This engages learners because it is a critical
and creative problem-solving process that draws on computer science concepts and processes. It is not
about coding for coding's sake, or writing lines of code one after the other, but about developing an
approach to solving complex problems that engages in a reflective and empathetic analysis of the
situation, its representation, and the operationalization of a solution that takes advantage of the
metacognitive strategies associated with computational thinking.
Computational thinking is presented by Wing as a set of attitudes and knowledge that are universally
applicable, beyond the use of machines; "this set of intellectual tools includes, for example, the ability

to name objects in a relevant way and to make their type or category explicit in order to manipulate
them correctly, to master the complexity of a large problem or system in a mechanical way (Wing,
2009, para. 3) . The term 'computational thinking' is used to show that the aim is not only to introduce
students to programming but also to enable them to take a step back from the digital world and to
position the learning of computer science as a cross-curricular skill that draws on the digital world to
develop thinking strategies. Computational thinking is thus intended to be emancipatory, with the aim
of helping to form enlightened citizens who can be both critically minded actors and also have the
capacity to understand and (co)create with the "panoply of digital tools" that Wing evokes when
talking about computational thinking.

The development of a critical and creative approach to digital technology through computational
thinking allows learners to move beyond a user posture that might perceive AI as a black box full of
mysteries, dangers, or unlimited hopes. The understanding of the challenges of analyzing problems in
relation to specific socio-cultural contexts (e.g., migration issues) is a way of seeing computer science
as both a science and a technology that will allow us, starting from the limits and constraints of our
models of a problem, to try to give answers that will be fed by increasingly massive data, without
being able to be considered relevant or valuable without the involvement of human judgement.

Computational
thinking competency development can serve for addressing the challenges of
human-AI collaboration and for understanding and navigating the complex world of AI, as they
enable individuals to analyze problems, develop strategies, and make informed decisions in the
context of rapidly changing technological
landscapes. Furthermore, computational thinking can
promote critical
thinking and creativity, which are vital for effectively managing and leading
organizations that are influenced by AI technologies. The implications of computational thinking for
management and leadership in organizations are essential at different levels of the workforce. Leaders
the workforce to develop
need to foster a culture of lifelong learning that encourages all
computational
the way to incorporate AI-human
to better consider
improvements in their work. This may involve providing training and development opportunities,
creating supportive learning environments, and promoting collaboration to address human-AI
challenges. For this objective, Romero et al. (2022) propose a Techno-creative Problem-Solving
(TCPS) framework for the development of computational thinking through creative programming in
lifelong learning.

thinking competencies

Figure 1. Techno-creative Problem-Solving (TCPS) framework

Human-AI collaboration in HRM

The literature review draws on several studies that have explored the challenges and opportunities of
AI in different contexts. Budhwar et al. (2022) conducted a review and research agenda on the
challenges and opportunities of AI for international human resource management (HRM). They
highlighted the need for HRM to adapt to the changes brought by AI, including the development of
new skills and competencies for managing AI technologies in an international context. Fügener et al.
intelligence collaboration and
(2022) investigated the cognitive challenges in human-artificial
explored the path towards productive delegation. They emphasized the importance of understanding
the cognitive capabilities and limitations of both humans and AI systems in order to optimize their
collaboration. Arslan et al. (2021) discussed the challenges and potential HRM strategies for
managing the interaction between artificial intelligence and human workers at the team level. They
highlighted the need for HRM to address the social, ethical, and psychological challenges associated
with AI integration in teams.

Discussion

This paper highlights the importance of computational thinking, critical thinking, and creativity in the
context of lifelong learning and their implications for management and leadership in organizations.
Our society needs to face the emergence of AI with a more critical and creative education. This
lifelong learning challenge presents significant challenges for the workforce; however, by embracing
computational
individuals and
organizations can effectively address these challenges and thrive in the rapidly evolving technological
landscape. For informed citizenship in the digital age, we need to continue to sharpen our critical,
creative, and collaborative problem-solving skills while adding a new string to our bow: the
development of computational thinking.

thinking, and creativity as key competencies,

thinking, critical

References

Alexandre, F., Becker, J., Comte, M.-H., Lagarrigue, A., Liblau, R., Romero, M., & Viéville, T.
(2021). Why, What and How to help each Citizen to Understand Artificial Intelligence?
KI-Künstliche Intelligenz, 1–9, 1610–1987.

Alexandre, F., Comte, M.-H., Lagarrigue, A., Mercier, C., Palaude, A., Romero, M., & Viéville, T.
(2023). Un MOOC pour initier à l’IA : « Intelligence artificielle avec intelligence ». In M.
Romero, L. Heiser, & A. Lepage (Eds.), Enseigner et apprendre à l’ère de l’intelligence
artificielle. Acculturation, intégration et usages créatifs de l’IA en éducation: Vol. Livre blanc
(pp. 9–15). https://hal.science/hal-04013223

Alexandre, F., de Barretin, R., Becker, J., Comte, M.-H., Courbin, M., Cruchon, S., Lagarrigue, A.,

Masse, B., De Quatrebarbes, S., Stein, J., Terosier, C., & Vieville, T. (2020, submitted).
Understanding Intelligently Artificial Intelligence: A citizens’ open formation. International
Workshop on Education in Artificial Intelligence K-12 (EDUAI-20).

Alexandre, F., Mercier, C., Palaude, A., Romero, M., & Viéville, T. (2022, May 12). The role of
cognitive processes in creative problem solving: A computational approach. 7th annual
meeting of the Society for the Neuroscience of Creativity (SfNC 2022).
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03659409

Arslan, A., Cooper, C., Khan, Z., Golgeci, I., & Ali, I. (2021). Artificial intelligence and human

workers interaction at team level: A conceptual assessment of the challenges and potential
HRM strategies. International Journal of Manpower, 43(1), 75–88.

https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-01-2021-0052

Beckmann, J. F. (2006). Superiority: Always and everywhere? On some misconceptions in the
validation of dynamic testing. Educational and Child Psychology, 23(3), 35.
Budhwar, P., Malik, A., De Silva, M. T. T., & Thevisuthan, P. (2022). Artificial intelligence –

challenges and opportunities for international HRM: A review and research agenda. The
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 33(6), 1065–1097.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2022.2035161

Cetindamar, D., Kitto, K., Wu, M., Zhang, Y., Abedin, B., & Knight, S. (2022). Explicating AI

Literacy of Employees at Digital Workplaces. IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3138503

Cugurullo, F., & Acheampong, R. A. (2023). Fear of AI: An inquiry into the adoption of autonomous
cars in spite of fear, and a theoretical framework for the study of artificial intelligence
technology acceptance. AI & SOCIETY. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01598-6

Fügener, A., Grahl, J., Gupta, A., & Ketter, W. (2022). Cognitive Challenges in Human–Artificial

Intelligence Collaboration: Investigating the Path Toward Productive Delegation. Information
Systems Research, 33(2), 678–696. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2021.1079

Gardner, H., & Hatch, T. (1989). Educational Implications of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences.
Educational Researcher, 18(8), 4–10. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X018008004
Henriksen, D., Mishra, P., & Fisser, P. (2016). Infusing Creativity and Technology in 21st Century

Education: A Systemic View for Change. Educational Technology & Society, 19(3), 27–37.

Isaac, G., Romero, M., & Barma, S. (2022). Understanding co-creativity in real-world problem

solving in project-based learning in higher education. Revue Internationale Du CRIRES :
Innover Dans La Tradition de Vygotsky / CRI\_SAS International Journal: Vygotsky’s
Heritage: Innovation in Education, 6(3), 86–99. https://doi.org/10.51657/ric.v6i2.51585

Lafuente Martínez, M., Lévêque, O., Benítez, I., Hardebolle, C., & Zufferey, J. D. (2022). Assessing
Computational Thinking: Development and Validation of the Algorithmic Thinking Test for
Adults. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 073563312110578.
https://doi.org/10.1177/07356331211057819

Laupichler, M. C., Aster, A., Schirch, J., & Raupach, T. (2022). Artificial intelligence literacy in

higher and adult education: A scoping literature review. Computers and Education: Artificial
Intelligence, 3, 100101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100101

Lucas, B., & Spencer, E. (2017). Teaching creative thinking: Developing learners who generate ideas

and can think critically. Crown House Publishing Limited.

Menon, D., Viéville, T., & Romero, M. (2019). Computational thinking development and assessment

through tabletop escape games. International Journal of Serious Games.
Piaget, J. (1953). Genetic Psychology and Epistemology. Diogenes, 1(1), 49–63.

https://doi.org/10.1177/039219215300100105

Romero, M. (2018). Développer la pensée informatique pour démystier l’intelligence artificielle. 1024

– Bulletin de La Société Informatique de France, 12, 67–75.

Romero, M., Davidson, A.-L., Cucinelli, G., Ouellet, H., & Arthur, K. (2016). Learning to code: From

procedural puzzle-based games to creative programming. Learning and Teaching Innovation
Impacts. International Conference on University Teaching and Innovation, Barcelona, Spain.

Romero, M., Freiman, V., & Rafalska, M. (2022). Techno-creative Problem-Solving (TCPS)

Framework for Transversal Epistemological and Didactical Positions: The Case Studies of
CreaCube and the Tower of Hanoi. In C. Michelsen, A. Beckmann, V. Freiman, U. T.
Jankvist, & A. Savard (Eds.), Mathematics and Its Connections to the Arts and Sciences
(MACAS): 15 Years of Interdisciplinary Mathematics Education (pp. 245–274). Springer
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-10518-0\_13

Romero, M., Heiser, L., & Lepage, A. (Eds.). (2023). Enseigner et apprendre à l’ère de l’intelligence

artificielle. Acculturation, intégration et usages créatifs de l’IA en éducation: Vol. Livre
blanc. https://hal.science/hal-04013223

Romero, M., Lepage, A., & Lille, B. (2017). Computational thinking development through creative

programming in higher education. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher
Education, 14(1), 42.

Romero, M., Lille, B., & Patino, A. (Eds.). (2017). Usages créatifs du numérique pour

l’apprentissage au XXIe siècle (Vol. 1). Presses de l’Université du Québec.

Sternberg, R. J., & Halpern, D. F. (2020). Critical Thinking in Psychology. Cambridge University

Press.

Tang, Z., & Kejriwal, M. (2023). Can language representation models think in bets? Royal Society

Open Science, 10(3), 221585. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.221585

Villani, C., Bonnet, Y., Berthet, C., Levin, F., Schoenauer, M., Cornut, A. C., & Rondepierre, B.

(2018). Donner un sens à l’intelligence artificielle: Pour une stratégie nationale et
européenne. Conseil national du numérique.

Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33–35.
Wing, J. M. (2009). La pensée informatique. Interstices.

https://interstices.info/jcms/c\_43267/la-pensee-informatique

