Computational thinking development and assessment
through tabletop escape games
Divya Menon, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Divya Menon, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville. Computational thinking development and
International Journal of Serious Games, 2019, 6,
assessment through tabletop escape games.
￿10.17083/ijsg.v6i4.319￿. ￿hal-02909661￿

HAL Id: hal-02909661

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02909661

Submitted on 3 Aug 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Computational thinking development and assessment through 
tabletop escape games 
Divya Menon1,2, Margarida Romero2, Thierry Viéville1,2 
Inria, Mnemosyne Research Team and Science Outreach divya.menon@etu.univ-
cotedazur.fr, thierry.vieville@inria.fr 
2Learning, INnovation and Education, Université Côte d’Azur 
margarida.romero@unice.fr 

1

Abstract 

The development and assessment of computational thinking (CT) is garnering a 
lot of attention and research since the last decade. However, CT learning is 
perceived as a time-consuming and frustrating experience by many K-12 and 
university students. Hence, educators are coming up with various 
methodologies to make CT both accessible and engaging for learners, thus 
leading to a spurt in various game-based learning (GBL) approaches in this 
field, ranging from board games to educational robotic games. This paper 
strives to evaluate tabletop escape games as a potential tool to develop CT as a 
competency among K-12 learners and the assessment of its effectiveness in 
achieving the learning outcomes. To do this, the authors conducted a literature 
review of existing papers on tabletop games that use the theme of an escape 
game to develop and assess CT as a competency. Based on a systematic 
analysis of the existing literature, they conducted an analytical review of three 
papers on tabletop games in CT to identify the CT components being 
developed, the evaluation methods explained in them, the current limitations 
faced by the authors of these three papers and the possible ways to circumvent 
such limitations. This paper also covers the design aspects to be considered for 
the development of a CT-based educational escape game to support and 
evaluate this competency and its components. 

Keywords: Game-Based Learning, Escape Game, Board Game, Tabletop Game, 
Computational Thinking, Competency Assessment 

1 Introduction 

Since the last decade, computational thinking (CT) is being increasingly identified as an 
important competency for learners of all ages, not just by educators but also by 
researchers and policymakers [1] [2]. Most of our everyday activities rely on digital 
technologies for efficient functioning; hence future professionals need to develop CT 
competency for their personal and professional activities. A growing corpus of research is 
being developed to define learning activities aimed at supporting its development and 
assessment [1] [3] [4]. From the present review of literature on CT, there appears to be no 
debate on the importance of integrating it with K-12 education and its relevance not just 
in the world of computer science but in our everyday lives. It can help improve the current 
test-driven educational model by transforming it into a competency-based educational 
model. 

 
 
Though there appear to be a variety of definitions available among current literature 
on CT when applied to the context of K-12 education, there is a growing consensus on the 
CT definition provided by Cuny, Snyder, and Wing [5], who define it as “the thought 
processes involved in formulating problems and their solutions so that the solutions are 
represented in a form that can be effectively carried out by an information-processing 
agent” (p.1). The ISTE repository [6] elaborates on this further by defining CT as a 
problem-solving process that includes identifying the problem, selecting appropriate tools 
to solve the problem (computers or other tools), organising and analysing collected data 
logically, representing 
identifying and 
experimenting with possible solutions and finding ways to automate them (through 
algorithmic thinking) for maximum efficiency and applying this knowledge to a variety of 
other problems. But when viewed as a competency to be developed, Shute, Sun and 
Asbell-Clarke [7] explain that “computational thinking skills include managing 
information effectively and efficiently with technologies in our data-driven era” (p.1). 

this data using models or simulations, 

Grover and Pea [8] suggest that CT is a competency that needs to be developed 

among all learners. They cite Wing et al. [9] and explain that “CT being viewed as at the 
core of all STEM disciplines, it appears that computing in K-12 is an idea whose time has 
come” (p.2). As a competency, CT is not just about learning to code using block and text-
based programming. Students need to be empowered with the necessary competencies to 
resolve problems by thinking critically and creatively. Resnick [10] explains that their 
"educational mission is to engage students in thinking creatively, to encourage systematic 
thinking and working collaboratively - essential skills for everyone in today's society" 
(para 5). Hershkovitz et al. [11] expand on this further by proposing that providing 
learners with programming environments where they can use their creativity could help in 
fostering their overall learning as well. In this context, CT is being recognised as one of 
the most suitable competencies to be developed because it encompasses problem-solving, 
critical thinking and logical thinking. Hence, its advantages are not restricted to only those 
who wish to pursue a career related to information technology. 

An uninitiated learner may find CT a complex competency to acquire, either because 
of a lack of motivation or due to ineffective learning strategies [18] [19] [20]. Despite its 
acknowledged importance to the present and future generations, this identification of a 
lack of interest among learners might be one of the reasons that has prompted various 
studies into efficient learning methods to develop CT competency. While there are three 
approaches to develop the CT competency, namely computer programming [10], 
educational robotics [13] and unplugged activities [12], educators and researchers are 
considering the use of different game-based learning (GBL) activities within these 
approaches to engage learners with CT. GBL refers to a learning approach in which 
gameplay is designed around definitive learning outcomes and ensures the integration of 
game mechanics with experiential learning. In certain contexts, GBL can support the 
development of competencies and learning objectives [21]. Currently, escape games are 
gaining popularity as a GBL and gamification tool due to their immersive and engaging 
nature. Hence, in this paper, the authors strived to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
tabletop version of escape games as a potential GBL activity to develop and assess CT as 
a competency. 

1.1 Research questions addressed within this paper 

In this paper, the authors conducted a literature review of existing papers (in English) on 
tabletop escape games that were used as a medium to develop and assess CT as a 
competency. The purpose of this paper is to address the following research questions: 

● Currently, are there any papers on tabletop games based on the theme of an 

escape game that study the development and assessment of CT? 

● What CT components do these tabletop escape games cover? 
● What methods do the authors of these papers use to assess the development of CT 

among K-12 and university students? 

 
● Are there features of tabletop escape games that could make them a potential 

method to develop and assess CT as a competency? 

● Are there any limitations to using tabletop escape games as a learning approach 

towards CT? If so, how can they be circumvented? 

Before evaluating the potential of tabletop escape games to develop and assess CT 

competency, it is crucial to first understand its components and their definitions, which 
will be discussed in the next section. 

1.2 Common CT components and their definitions 

Today, CT is not restricted to the knowledge of or related to computers but includes some 
pertinent cognitive abilities that can be imparted through computational topics. This 
includes not only computer programming itself but as pointed out in the referred 
definitions of CT [5] [7], information coding and decoding, formal language (with respect 
to human language) understanding and mechanical processes (for example, parallel versus 
sequential processes and process complexity). The available literature on CT competency 
offers diverse opinions on what components constitute this broad subject. Brennan and 
Resnick [17] propose a three-dimensional CT framework comprising computational 
concepts (such as sequences, parallelism, conditionals, etc.); computational practices 
(such as debugging, reusing or sharing code, etc.); and computational perspectives (such 
as questioning or collaborating). According to Wing [12], CT covers five core aspects, 
including conditional logic, distributed processing, debugging, simulation and algorithm 
building. Denning [13] elaborates on this by referring to the computer as a tool rather than 
the object of study in computation and computation as an ever-changing way of 
representing information. He classifies the principles of computer science into computing, 
coordination, communication, recollection, automation, design and evaluation. When 
Papert [14] used the term ‘computational thinking’ in Mindstorms, he also referred to 
computers as “objects-to-think-with” that can be used in K-12 education (p.182) as an 
alternative to traditional learning environments, because they can engage learners, 
regardless of age, owing to their “universality” (p.8). 

Based on Wing’s definition of CT [12] and Papert’s [14] materiality of “objects-to-
think-with”, Romero, Lepage and Lille [13] developed a six-component CT framework 
(CT6) including the identification of the problem (COMPO1 for component 1), 
organisation and modeling of the problem (COMPO2), formal systems (COMPO31) to 
refer to code, physical systems (COMPO4) to refer to the hardware and other tangible 
connected objects, devising a solution (COMPO5) and solution evaluation and iterative 
improvement (COMPO6). 

1 COMPO3 was initially named “code literacy” before being renamed as “formal systems”; COMPO4 was 
initially named “technology literacy” before being renamed as “physical systems” after a focus group on CT 
[19]. 

 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Computational thinking components of the CT6 framework [15] 
The table below lists the CT components and subcomponents assessed under CT 
competency and their definitions, used as the coding schema for the analysis of tabletop 
escape games for CT in this paper. 

Table 1: List of CT subcomponents in CT6 framework 

The next section will introduce opportunities in GBL to support the development of 

different CT components and subcomponents. 

2 Educational escape games to develop CT 

Escape games originated as games played within a locked room where players work in 
teams to strategize their escape by solving puzzles and overcoming challenges to discover 
hidden keys. In recent years, they have gained tremendous popularity as a game-based 
and gamification tool that can be used to promote learning of any chosen subject for 
diverse groups of learners. Nicholson [16] defines escape games as “live-action team-
based games where players discover clues, solve puzzles and accomplish tasks in one or 
more rooms in order to accomplish a specific goal (usually escaping from a room) in a 
limited time'' (p.1). Today, educational escape games can be played in a classroom, 
online, through board games, or even from a box. 

 
 
 
 
Escape games are based on a problem-solving narrative in which players are unaware 
of the expected outcomes. To play, they need to understand the problem and identify and 
implement a solution. Achieving the objectives of the escape game requires players to 
think creatively and work within their teams. Moreover, escape games could offer 
educators the flexibility to integrate any chosen subject with the theme of the game, which 
makes them suitable to accomplish any learning objectives, including those requiring a 
certain complexity such as in CT development. Educational escape games could be a 
potential medium to aid in developing and assessing CT components because they 
leverage the features of serious games to immerse learners in a narrative-based problem-
solving scenario. 

Educational escape games have the potential to be adapted to different disciplines in 
different learning environments. As a game that requires players to be actively involved in 
the problem-solving process, escape games could prove to be suitable for CT 
development and assessment. As with any competency, CT can also be effectively 
imbibed when learners practice the knowledge they gain. In escape games, learners are 
engaged to apply the knowledge they gain to complete challenges or tasks, thereby 
learning by doing [17]. They could offer learners the opportunity to experience, reflect on 
and apply the learning they gain during the course of a game [18]. Apart from being 
actively involved, learners should receive timely feedback on their progress and get ample 
opportunities for trial and error before they succeed in achieving the learning objectives 
without fear of failure [19]. This aspect makes escape games suitable, because 
irrespective of the medium in which learners play it, they apply their learning to 
accomplish tasks and hence, receive feedback in terms of visual representations or 
debriefing at the end of each task. Moreover, topics like CT may have a better chance of 
development among learners if a scaffolding approach is used. These games require 
learners to use their existing knowledge to complete challenges, thereby acquiring new 
knowledge along the way. Escape games usually have levels of progression which can be 
used by educators to initially introduce learners to foundational CT concepts. Gradually, 
as they progress to higher levels, learners can be provided with opportunities to gain 
advanced knowledge and apply it either during gameplay or through game creation. 

Escape games are a specific subtype of cooperative games wherein players “work 

together to win or lose as a team” [20, p.2]. These games are based on positive 
interdependence [21], but they have specific features, such as the operationalisation 
through a narrative of space-time in which the character should escape a certain threat. 
The engagement of learners through escape games could be an interesting way of 
physically and cognitively engaging them, and similar to other cooperative games 
utilising positive interdependence to solve a complex task. Another specificity of escape 
games is their materiality and embodiment of the learner-player. While some cooperative 
games in sports education are based on embodiment and materiality (objects mediating 
the interactions), the embodiment and materiality for CT learning through escape games 
lead to a very specific learning activity engaging the learner in a multi-sensorial way of 
learning. 

Board games are described as a medium to support and evaluate the players’ CT 

components. In this paper, we will be evaluating educational escape games with reference 
to the CT components described by Romero, Lepage and Lille [15]. According to Berland 
and Lee [22], board games can help with this analysis better than digital games since in 
the digital version the game rules are strictly enforced by game mechanics, whereas in 
board and other tabletop games players are required to plan and execute strategies based 
on their knowledge of the game rules, thereby resorting to CT. They conducted a study on 
three groups of novice players (aged 17 to 19 years) using Pandemic, a strategy-based 
board game, in which players have to fight against four highly infectious diseases that are 
spreading in various cities across the world by collecting, sharing and using the 
information to ultimately win the game 2. They analysed the responses of players in the 

2 We invite the reader to play Pandemic game here: http://pandemic2.org/ 

 
 
five elements of procedural CT, which include conditional action (deciding on the best 
moves within the game), algorithm building (devising a plan-of-action, which can be 
reused later for other moves), debugging (identifying errors based on moves taken and 
their impact on the game), simulation (using hypotheses to test possible outcomes) and 
distributed computing (information sharing by different players while strategizing based 
on a rule-based plan). Berland and Lee [22] ended the paper on the note that while board 
games could positively contribute by helping players to develop CT components, further 
research was needed in this area. 

In another example, Apostolellis et al. [23] devised a board game, RaBit EscAPE, 

with the primary objective of promoting CT through collaborative play for players 
between the ages of 6 to 10 years. In an informal study conducted using this board game, 
two groups of three players each aged 8 to 10 years from an elementary school were 
asked to combine wooden bits (that comprise varying magnet placements and polarity 
combinations) to first construct blocks and then paths over a predefined route to help the 
token (a rabbit) escape from the apes (bits that need to be repelled from the path). In this 
way, players are challenged to use logical thinking to analyse and organise data, 
algorithmic thinking to come up with the steps to be followed, simulation to identify and 
experiment with possible solutions, debugging when a possible solution doesn’t work, as 
well as problem-solving and collaborative thinking, among other social competencies. 
The RaBit EscAPE game covers the problem analysis component of CT, which includes 
problem identification, organisation and modelling. It also makes players use sequencing, 
conditional logic and algorithm building skills that come under formal systems and the 
solution evaluation and iteration component. In the game, players compete against each 
other by starting on the opposite sides of the board to complete the path. By rolling the 
dice, they decide how many wooden bits they can use in each move to build their path. 
They need to strategize and hypothesize, thus using model building and simulation skills, 
which are components covered under CT. The game uses a board game without any 
digital devices; hence it doesn’t cover the physical systems’ component. Another 
important aspect to be considered is that since the writers conducted an exploratory study, 
the paper doesn't explain if the competencies mobilised by the players converted into code 
literacy for them. The study of Apostolellis et al. [23] doesn’t address CT assessment 
explicitly, but their study engages learners in a tabletop escape game that covers most of 
the CT components, including logical thinking, algorithmic thinking, simulation, 
debugging, problem-solving and collaborative thinking. They concluded that there is a 
need to further develop the evaluation of their unplugged board game activity to 
understand its impact better. 

Young learners can also be motivated to learn computer programming, and therefore, 
CT, by using programming as a medium to integrate physical and cognitive activity, one 
that requires learners to use their hands and mind to achieve the given objectives [24]. A 
study was conducted in China on seven children aged around 8 years with some prior 
knowledge of computers but without any prior programming experience to test out this 
idea. They used T-Maze, a physical programming tool for children between the ages of 5 
to 9 years, to play multi-level maze escape games and build their own mazes by tinkering 
with some wooden blocks. This game seems to be inspired by the concept of board games 
as well as escape games. They connected wooden blocks, some of which are equipped 
with magnets and others with sensors, to either move a virtual avatar on the screen to 
escape from a maze (using sensor blocks) or build a new maze by recreating a maze map 
and passable paths. TopCode [25], a computer vision system, was used in the study to 
identify symbols on blocks to convert physical programs into digital codes automatically. 
During the play, children received real-time visual and audio feedback, which helped 
them analyse and debug their programs. In T-Maze there was no time pressure on learners 
to complete tasks. With this study, they concluded that children were able to learn 
concepts of abstraction, automation (loops), problem decomposition and analysis and 
creativity. The authors also specified how children were able to create their own 

programs, achieve a high level of engagement and that there was a possibility that this 
game could help enhance children’s understanding of CT. 

Some researchers rely on digital versions of escape games to develop CT. For 

example, Program Your Robot [26] introduces learners to introductory concepts of CT, 
while developing relevant competencies through a digital puzzle-solving game. Players 
aged 17 to 19 years have to program a virtual robot by following a set of rules and using 
programming methods, such as sequence, conditionals, iteration and loops. They use a 
progressive learning method, in which each level introduces players to an advanced level 
of knowledge about CT competency. Though the writers are yet to conduct a formal study 
of this game, they have collected initial feedback from computer science students with 
prior knowledge of programming. According to Kazimoglu et al. [26], students found this 
game suitable to help them understand introductory programming concepts and they 
mention that “this type of gameplay allows players to visualise how programming 
constructs work” (p.7). 

2.1 Educational escape games to assess CT 

The previous section mentions various initiatives that support CT development through 
educational escape games. However, there is also a need for formative and summative 
assessment of CT that complements learner activities. Since escape games are usually 
implemented through diverse technologies and meant to be completed within a specific 
duration, there could be a variety of possibilities for learning game analytics in CT. 
Steiner et al. [27] cite the Society for Learning Analytics Research (SoLAR) when 
defining learning analytics as “the measurement, collection, analysis and reporting of 
data” (p.1). To collect this data, they classify learning games assessment into real-time 
game analytics and post-game analytics which help in “linking observable game 
behaviour with…learning outcomes and competence…” (p.2). In real-time game 
analytics, the assessment method is embedded within the game design by taking into 
account criteria, such as level progression, number of attempts, scores earned by a player 
and player inputs including the time to start and end the game and clicks or movements to 
accomplish a task. Post-game analytics include correlation of learning objectives with the 
behaviours and actions of players, as well as using post-tests and player feedback to 
collect and measure data. In escape games, learning data could be collected through 
observations during each play activity, by analysing video recordings or manual logs of 
player behaviour and actions (using specific coding schemas of the CT aspects to assess), 
or even pre-task or post-task questionnaires on CT competency, such as the 
Computational Thinking Test (CTT) [28]. In all these cases, there is a need to design the 
assessment of CT at the instructional level to ensure that it supports CT development in 
learners. Additionally, it could also be helpful for educators to be able to certify the 
achievement of certain learning objectives in relation to CT. We will be discussing 
different assessment methods used by some tabletop educational escape games in the fifth 
section of this paper. 

3 Methodology 

The objective of this study is to carry out a systematic analysis of specific components 
and subcomponents of CT supported through tabletop escape games. We have reviewed 
various published works in English on educational escape games that aim to develop CT 
competency. The literature references have been accessed using keywords that comprise 
escape games, board games, tabletop games and game-based learning for computational 
thinking. The primary sources for these papers are ResearchGate, Google Scholar and 
ScienceDirect. Though we haven’t restricted the papers by their year of publication, 
special emphasis was given to review papers that covered educational escape games for 
learners of diverse age groups, with varying levels of knowledge in computer science and 

 
using different gaming and learning approaches to introduce CT. The different mediums 
used to implement these games include unplugged board games, escape games with 
computer programming and escape games using robotic tools. 

\*No published papers with escape games using educational robotics to develop CT were 
found. 
Figure 2: Mediums used by various educational escape games for CT 

Another important criterion was to consider the CT components that were being 

covered through each of these games. In some of the papers, the writers mentioned the 
assessment of creativity, collaboration and CT among other competencies. Though we do 
not dispute their importance as critical competencies, we have focused on papers that 
target the achievement of these competencies by covering the main CT components. 

At the initial stage, we began by searching for English papers on educational escape 
games, with a special focus on digital or tabletop games for CT development. We selected 
papers which focused on studies conducted for CT development in K-12 education (for 
learners between the ages of 6 to 19 years). A list of all the reviewed games and reasons 
for eliminating them from the purview of this literature review is mentioned in Table 2 of 
this paper. 

Table 2: List of papers analysed for this paper 

 
 
 
 
 
From this list, we shortlisted eight papers that use the concept of escape games for 
CT. Out of these, we filtered and shortlisted three tabletop games which include the RaBit 
EscAPE game [23], Pandemic board game [22] and T-Maze [24] based on the 
characteristics of escape games defined by Nicholson [16] and Clarke et al. [33] shown in 
Table 3. 

Table 3: Checklist for Educational Escape Game Characteristics 

Each of these three games meets six or more characteristics of an educational escape 
game, as presented in Table 3. For example, in the RaBit EscApe game [23], Apostolellis 
et al. used the theme of helping rabbit tokens escape from enemy ape tokens to engage 
learners with the CT topic. Though Pandemic has not been proposed as an escape game 
by Berland and Lee [22], we have included it in our literature review for this paper since 
it also meets most of the requirements of an escape game. In their paper, the writers are 
studying whether this tabletop game can help in the development of CT spontaneously 
during gameplay. It is a collaborative game in which players need to escape from and 
avoid the spreading of viruses into cities within the game by strategizing and planning 
their moves. Similar to escape games, Pandemic is based on a problem scenario that 
players need to solve by cooperating rather than playing against each other within a 
stipulated time (before the four diseases spread to all the cities). During the game, 
additional challenges are introduced and players are expected to solve them by sharing 
knowledge and discovering additional strategies. Their actions impact the outcomes at 

 
 
 
 
 
every stage of the game and the overall game outcomes as well. Lastly, the T-Maze [24] 
game also uses the concept of escaping from a maze. 

These games were shortlisted based on the information provided in these papers about 
the methodology through which they identified observable behaviours to ensure CT 
components were introduced among their players. The remaining five papers were 
excluded from this literature review since they propose an educational escape game that 
could be used to develop CT, however, have not yet conducted any studies, formal or 
otherwise, in which the game was played by learners and observed for its effectiveness as 
a possible learning tool for CT. Even though only three papers meet the selection criteria, 
the quality of the studies, the diversity of game types chosen (Pandemic, RaBit EscApe 
and T-Maze) and the level of the description provided us with ample information to 
achieve the research objectives of our study. 

3.1 

Instruments and Coding 

The systematic analysis of the shortlisted tabletop escape game papers for CT 
development was conducted based on the components introduced in the theoretical 
framework. Three researchers, with an expertise in CT assessment, worked together to 
evaluate these papers and discuss the ambiguities that appeared during the analysis 
process. While we have not replicated the methodology of these games, we have analysed 
the methodology and results of these studies. This analysis was developed using a 
framework of six CT components based on Wing’s [5] definition of CT. 

4 Results 

The table below is organised according to the CT components being analysed. Coloured 
cells indicate those components which were not only defined as a learning objective but 
also operationalised as observable behaviours to be evaluated in each of the above-
mentioned three games. 

Table 4: Systematic analysis of the three tabletop escape games for CT development 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the three games analysed in terms of the operationalisation of CT competency in 

this paper, the writers have specified that they are yet to conduct a formal study to assess 
CT development. However, they have identified what observable indicators will help in 
the assessment stage when an empirical study is conducted. 

From our analysis, we can observe that all the three games cover most of the CT 

components, including all the components under the problem analysis axis as well as 
under the creation axis. Under the systems axis, most of the games didn’t provide learners 
with the opportunity to gain an understanding of the physical systems. Moreover, all three 
games required players to use the concept of algorithms to achieve an objective, but the 
players didn’t understand that they were using algorithms. Writing codes was not 
accomplished in any of the games. As specified clearly in the three papers, though the 
players used specific CT components to achieve success in the games, those components 
didn’t transform into an understanding of the underlying concepts that are part of the CT 
competency. Next, we will provide references from each of the papers about these 
assessment indicators for each of the subcomponents. 

In the RaBit EscAPE game, the writers conducted an informal study using an 
unplugged approach to develop CT competency. Based on their learning from this initial 
study, they have given examples of how they will assess the CT competency marked in 
Table 2 in future studies conducted on this game. The observable behaviours are 
mentioned on page four of their paper. To assess model formation and simulation, players 
should be able to “form and contrast hypotheses” and “draw the blocks on the board but 
without placing the bits”. Conditional logic will be identified when players analyse 
polarity of the magnets on each wooden block in response to the path to be created while 
repelling the ape blocks based on the minus and plus signs (for example, “If I place this 
bit here, then this block has a minus on the bottom and needs a big square piece with a 
plus on the top”). This will also help players practice and understand pattern recognition 
when “identifying which bits create blocks that can fit the path printed on the board while 
also attracting adjacent blocks or repelling ape blocks”. Players should be able to 
implement algorithm building by “combining different requirements to build a set of steps 
that will lead to an efficient solution of a problem”. To logically organise and analyse 
data, players will have to arrange the wooden pieces into blocks first and use block 
combinations that correspond to the path to be built. Finally, though players won’t receive 

 
 
real-time feedback, they’ll have to wait till they finish building the path to attempt 
iteration and debugging (i.e., “in case of wrong placement of bits, starting all over to 
complete the path in the correct way”). 

In the paper on the Pandemic game, the writers rely on the CT definitions provided by 
Wing [5], Papert [14] and National Research Council [36] and also use an unplugged 
board game for their study. As they explain in the paper, they use the players’ 
conversations and behaviours to systematically analyse whether the CT components were 
developed through this game. Three teams of players were asked to play the game 
separately and played within 60 to 90 minutes. To log the data for analysis, the players’ 
activities were video recorded and transcripts were generated from these videos. The 
videos were first classified according to gameplay turns and then subdivided based on 
utterances used by players. The utterances were then translated into rule comprehension 
and strategies on the part of the players. Based on this interpretative analysis, the writers 
created CT-related codes that are being cited from page nine of this paper. Players 
practised conditional logic when they had to “describe the chain of events that might 
happen based on the game’s rules, should a particular action be taken”. When the “player 
who moves their token to various spots and declares the actions they would take without 
releasing the token (and thus committing herself to a set of decisions)” (p. 9) they were 
simulating and modelling possible strategies. By clarifying the rules or strategies to be 
used in the game, the players resorted to the debugging method. Formulating a plan of 
action helped the players build an algorithm that can be generalised and used for future 
events within the game. The writers claim that the purpose of this paper was to 
demonstrate how computational thinking occurs through the gameplay of a strategic board 
game. However, what appears to be lacking in the paper is the comprehension of CT 
subcomponents among players, without focusing on 
subcomponents. 

the assessment of 

these 

The T-Maze game [24] uses a tangible programming approach. The writers conducted 

a study involving 20 children in a lab environment to improve CT in “children’s 
programming activities” (p.5). Two kinds of activities in the study included gameplay 
using maze escape and game programming using maze creation. The paper describes how 
each CT component development was observed during the game on page five of the 
paper. The players begin by identifying the problem by “knowing the ports where the path 
starts and ends, ...connect them ...with programming blocks”. They engage in organising 
and modelling the solution by comparing their plans to select the shortest path. Simulation 
can be observed when “children need to think about how to perceive the world 
coordinates of the virtual maze and how to map the behaviours in real world”. After the 
simulation, players have to “map themselves into the virtual characters on screen and 
control the characters’ behaviours” thereby implementing abstraction. The players engage 
in using formal systems through automation when they program using a run loop which 
“updates the feedback on screen and interacts with users based on designed rules for 
sensors” to complete the escape from the maze. Finally, they use real-time feedback to 
test and debug their programs. 

5 Discussion 

Several attempts are being made to use escape games in CT competency development 
across the globe, however, in most cases, there is a lack of published literature on the 
activity, its evaluation methods and the data to support its effectiveness. For example, 
Webby’s Challenge is an escape room concept developed by Frey [37] in the USA to 
introduce CT and coding activities to learners aged 10 years and above. Though the 
website introduces and explains the method of implementing this game in a classroom, 
the research data and learning game logs to support its effectiveness are missing. Among 
the escape games published in gaming platforms, Escape Code - Coding Adventure on 

Steam is a digital escape game that claims to integrate the subjects of coding, technology 
and artificial intelligence to allow players to learn while playing. However, it doesn’t 
provide any description of the method being employed or about its effectiveness in 
achieving the learning objectives [38]. 

Escape games are primarily regarded as activities that require special infrastructure 

and additional resources, including a room dedicated for the game, designers and 
facilitators, time and money to develop and evaluate the game and its effectiveness. These 
requirements might dissuade many educators from integrating escape games in their 
learning practices. Using miniature representations of escape games, such as Breakout 
EDU kits [39], is a great idea, however, the cost of such kits could be a major concern for 
educational organisations from economically marginalised countries. A welcome 
approach would be to use tabletop escape games that can be created with a do-it-yourself 
approach which would encourage educators and learners to create their own escape 
games. Nevertheless, the design of a CT escape game would require them to follow a 
method of introducing, developing and evaluating CT components. 

One of the biggest limitations in the implementation of CT development in K-12 

education is in choosing the most effective medium of assessment, and this becomes more 
challenging with escape games. Werneburg et al. [40] refer to the assessment method used 
by Brennan and Resnick [41] who performed interviews to evaluate aspects like idea 
development and debugging of an activity based on their belief that CT cannot be 
assessed from a binary state of yes or no in terms of whether a task has been 
accomplished or not. They also mention the use of questionnaires by Grover and Basu 
[42] to detect errors in an activity, but the presence of errors in a programming syntax 
does not necessarily denote the lack of the CT competency. Romero et al. [15] have 
identified three prevalent approaches while assessing CT. The first type of assessment is 
followed by the Computer Science Teachers Association’s curriculum in the USA, 
wherein the content progresses based on grade, from low-level programming to object-
oriented programming, but doesn’t take into account competencies such as creativity. The 
second approach is as per the Barefoot’s CT model in the UK which includes assessing 
the learners’ ability to demonstrate logic, algorithms, decomposition, patterns, abstraction 
and evaluation, but it doesn’t evaluate knowledge retention after the assessment. The third 
approach is the kind that is followed by Dr. Scratch [43], which automatically scores a 
Scratch program on aspects, such as abstraction and logical thinking. However, as 
discussed before, though Dr. Scratch provides feedback on how a program can be 
improved, it does not take into account the objective that the learner sets out to 
accomplish or “the task demanded” (p.6). In many of the examples reviewed in this paper, 
there was a lack of information on the logs or how the assessment of CT components was 
done through these games. Some games, such as the RaBit EscAPE game [23], aim to 
develop multiple competencies ranging from problem-solving to efficiency, however, 
how the logs are developed are not clearly explained. When using a strategic board game, 
such as Pandemic [22] to assess the CT competency development, logs were maintained 
in the form of videos and transcripts to evaluate game-turns and utterances between 
players and translating these into codes for the strategies devised by players. But further 
research is needed to evaluate whether such games can support the development of CT 
competency. 

Studies are being conducted to identify suitable assessment models and tools for CT 
concepts. In their paper, Romero et al. [15] conducted a study with 120 undergraduate 
students at Université Laval in Canada to participate in a story2code creative 
programming challenge using Scratch and used two tools to conduct their assessment, 
including Dr. Scratch and #5c21, which is a tool developed by them wherein an educator 
identifies observable states with four levels of achievement for each activity. While Dr. 
Scratch is automated, #5c21 requires human expertise of the subject, and both tools assess 
different skills. Though they were able to successfully log the achievement levels of 
students through this study, the authors concluded by stating that this approach needs to 
be further developed before it can be used to evaluate complex activities aimed at 

developing the CT competency. It can also be noticed that nowadays the CT components 
on formal systems mainly focus on sequential imperative programming (at the difference 
of collective protocols or other programming paradigms such as functional programming) 
and only consider basic scalar value or list. Taking into account more complex useful data 
structures, other information coding issues, or other computational science mechanisms, 
such as those used in machine learning (often called artificial intelligence) is also useful. 
In both the educational science challenges and the actual curricula, it is reasonable to 
restrain to the former domain of sequential imperative programming with basic data 
structures, but we can be fairly certain that more issues are going to emerge in the near 
future, which necessitates further research on how such competencies can be learned. 
Through escape games, CT assessment can be developed through an engaging activity for 
learners in which the embodiment is higher than other survey-based assessments [44]. 
To ensure that an escape game could help achieve the expected learning outcomes, 
there are a few other important points to keep in mind as well. For this objective, we can 
start by identifying target players for whom the game is being designed. It is also 
important to identify topics and competencies to be covered and the learning objectives 
supporting the game activity within a perspective of constructive alignment [53] [54]. An 
engaging escape game needs to have a clear problem-solving objective and be based on a 
storyline that sets the tone and theme for the activity. Since time pressure could hamper 
the learning process, designers and educators need to decide on using it minimally or 
avoid it altogether to ensure a positive learning experience for players. The game design 
of escape games can consider the age and prior knowledge of target players to correctly 
adapt the GBL activities. Based on the existing research on game mechanics [40] [55] we 
can consider real-time feedback mechanisms to keep players engaged in the learning 
process and to enable them to debug their methods within the time constraints of the 
game. However, further research should be developed to better understand the way to 
consider time pressure and constraints in a way to support engagement without hindering 
the learning process. Debriefing at the end of every level or game must be integrated 
when designing the game to ensure that learners understand the concepts and knowledge 
retention is successfully achieved [25]. 

6 Conclusion 

Through the systematic analysis of the literature on tabletop escape games for CT 
competency development, the authors observe the potential of these games to engage and 
sustain a learner’s interest in the game while they develop CT competency. Through a 
detailed analysis of three tabletop escape games for CT development, it is observed that 
both the unplugged activities approach and the computer programming approach could 
help the learners remain actively involved in the learning process. Since escape games 
encourage players to use their problem-solving and cognitive abilities, they can be used as 
serious games for CT. Keeping in mind the different limitations that escape rooms might 
have when used for educational purposes in diverse educational backgrounds, tabletop 
escape games could be a possible solution to ensure learner engagement in the learning 
activity. However, a detailed review of these papers also highlights that the assessment 
methods to evaluate the effectiveness of these games need to be developed and tested in a 
more precise manner. The authors of this paper propose that further research is needed to 
ascertain how tabletop escape games can help in achieving the learning outcome of 
developing CT as a competency among K-12 learners. 

References 

[1] A. Yadav, C. Mayfield, N. Zhou, S. Hambrusch, and J. T. Korb, “Computational thinking in 

elementary and secondary teacher education,” ACM Trans. Comput. Educ. TOCE, vol. 14, 
no. 1, p. 5, 2014. 

[2] V. Barr and C. Stephenson, “Bringing computational thinking to K-12: what is Involved and 
what is the role of the computer science education community?,” ACM Inroads, vol. 2, no. 1, 
pp. 48–54, 2011. 

[3] P. Curzon, M. Dorling, T. Ng, C. Selby, and J. Woollard, “Developing computational 

thinking in the classroom: a framework,” 2014. 

[4] S. Y. Lye and J. H. L. Koh, “Review on teaching and learning of computational thinking 

[5] 

through programming: What is next for K-12?,” Comput. Hum. Behav., vol. 41, pp. 51–61, 
2014. 
J. Wing, L. Snyder, and J. M. Wing, “(PDF) Computational Thinking: What and Why?” 
2010. 
ISTE, “Computational Thinking Leadership Toolkit,” 2015. [Online]. Available: 
https://id.iste.org/docs/ct-documents/ct-leadershipt-toolkit.pdf. [Accessed: 05-Apr-2019]. 
[7] V. J. Shute, C. Sun, and J. Asbell-Clarke, “Demystifying computational thinking,” Educ. 

[6] 

Res. Rev., vol. 22, pp. 142–158, 2017. 

[8] S. Grover and R. Pea, “Computational Thinking in K–12 A Review of the State of the 

[9] 

Field,” Educ. Res., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 38–43, Jan. 2013. 
J. Wing, P. Henderson, O. Hazzan, and T. Cortina, “• An Overview of Computational 
Thinking,” p. 7, 2007. 

[10] M. Resnick, “A Different Approach To Coding - BRIGHT Magazine,” Medium, 26-Jun-
2019. [Online]. Available: https://brightthemag.com/a-different-approach-to-coding-
d679b06d83a. [Accessed: 16-Jul-2019]. 

[11] A. Hershkovitz, R. Sitman, R. Israel-Fishelson, A. Eguíluz, P. Garaizar, and M. Guenaga, 
“Creativity in the acquisition of computational thinking,” Interact. Learn. Environ., pp. 1–
17, 2019. 

[12] J. M. Wing, “Computational thinking,” Commun. ACM, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 33–35, 2006. 
[13] P. J. Denning, “The Profession of IT Beyond Computational thinking,” p. 3, 2009. 
[14] S. Papert, Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books, 

1980. 

[15] M. Romero, A. Lepage, and B. Lille, “Computational thinking development through creative 

programming in higher education,” Int. J. Educ. Technol. High. Educ., vol. 14, no. 1, p. 42, 
2017. 

[16] S. Nicholson, “(PDF) 

Peeking Behind the Locked Door:A Survey of Escape Room Facilities.” 2015. 
[17] M. Resnick et al., “Digital manipulatives: new toys to think with,” in Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 1998, pp. 281–287. 

[18] S. Nicholson, “Exploring Gamification Techniques for Classroom Management,” p. 7, 2013. 
[19] C. Obikwelu and J. C. Read, “The Serious Game Constructivist Framework for Children’s 

Learning | Elsevier Enhanced Reader,” 2012. [Online]. Available: 
https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S1877050912008174?token=7E3B3840CDB9F237
2D611DFA7A6F23B1F4454EF18F8E547091816645291FCC89F62D0F3B2F2BB958D9C0
9980B7A20C95. [Accessed: 18-Jul-2019]. 

[20] S. Nicholson, “Creating Engaging Escape Rooms for the Classroom,” Child. Educ., vol. 94, 

no. 1, pp. 44–49, 2018. 

[21] D. W. Johnson and R. T. Johnson, Cooperation and competition: Theory and research. 

Edina, MN, US: Interaction Book Company, 1989. 

[22] M. Berland and V. R. Lee, “Collaborative strategic board games as a site for distributed 

computational thinking,” Int. J. Game-Based Learn. IJGBL, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 65–81, 2011. 

[23] P. Apostolellis, M. Stewart, C. Frisina, and D. Kafura, “RaBit EscAPE: a board game for 

computational thinking,” in Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Interaction design and 
children, 2014, pp. 349–352. 

[24] D. Wang, T. Wang, and Z. Liu, “A Tangible Programming Tool for Children to Cultivate 
Computational Thinking,” The Scientific World Journal, 2014. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.hindawi.com/journals/tswj/2014/428080/abs/. [Accessed: 17-Apr-2019]. 
[25] M. Horn, “TopCodes: Tangible Object Placement Codes,” 2012. [Online]. Available: 
http://users.eecs.northwestern.edu/~mhorn/topcodes/. [Accessed: 23-Sep-2019]. 

[26] C. Kazimoglu, M. Kiernan, L. Bacon, and L. MacKinnon, “Learning Programming at the 

Computational Thinking Level via Digital Game-Play,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 9, pp. 
522–531, 2012. 

[27] C. M. Steiner, M. D. Kickmeier-Rust, and D. Albert, “MAKING SENSE OF GAME-

BASED USER DATA: LEARNING ANALYTICS IN APPLIED GAMES,” p. 4, 2015. 

[28] S. Arnab et al., “Mapping learning and game mechanics for serious games analysis,” Br. J. 

Educ. Technol., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 391–411, 2015. 

[29] K. Tsarava, K. Moeller, N. Pinkwart, M. Butz, U. Trautwein, and M. Ninaus, “Training 
Computational Thinking: Game-Based Unplugged and Plugged-in Activities in Primary 
School,” in European Conference on Games Based Learning, 2017, pp. 687–695. 

[30] T. Y. Lee, M. L. Mauriello, J. Ahn, and B. B. Bederson, “CTArcade: Computational 

thinking with games in school age children,” Int. J. Child-Comput. Interact., vol. 2, no. 1, 
pp. 26–33, 2014. 

[31] A. Chaffin, K. Doran, D. Hicks, and T. Barnes, “Experimental evaluation of teaching 

recursion in a video game,” in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on 
Video Games - Sandbox ’09, New Orleans, Louisiana, 2009, p. 79. 

[32] N. Brown, W. Darby, and H. Coronel, “An Escape Room as a Simulation Teaching 

Strategy,” Clin. Simul. Nurs., vol. 30, pp. 1–6, 2019. 

[33] S. Clarke, D. Peel, S. Arnab, L. Morini, H. Keegan, and O. Wood, “(PDF) EscapED: A 
Framework for Creating Educational Escape Rooms and Interactive Games to For 
Higher/Further Education.” 2017. 

[34] C. Borrego, C. Fernández, I. Blanes, and S. Robles, “Room escape at class: Escape games 

activities to facilitate the motivation and learning in computer science,” JOTSE, vol. 7, no. 2, 
pp. 162–171, 2017. 

[35] S. Tarkan et al., “Toque: designing a cooking-based programming language for and with 

children,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems, 
2010, pp. 2417–2426. 

[36] N. R. Council, Report of a Workshop on the Scope and Nature of Computational Thinking. 

2010. 

[37] S. Frey, “Webby’s Challenge: A Coding Escape Room,” Inverse Genius, 2018. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.inversegenius.com/gsl-blog/2018/5/1/webbys-challenge-a-coding-
escape-room. [Accessed: 06-May-2019]. 

[38] “Escape Code - Coding Adventure on Steam.” [Online]. Available: 

https://store.steampowered.com/app/842350/Escape\_Code\_\_Coding\_Adventure/. [Accessed: 
06-May-2019]. 

[39] “WELCOME TO BREAKOUT EDU,” Breakout EDU. [Online]. Available: 

https://www.breakoutedu.com/welcome. [Accessed: 16-Apr-2019]. 

[40] S. Werneburg, S. Manske, and H. U. Hoppe, “ctGameStudio – A Game-Based Learning 

Environment to Foster Computational Thinking,” p. 10, 2018. 

[41] K. Brennan and M. Resnick, “New frameworks for studying and assessing the development 

of computational thinking,” p. 25, 2012. 

[42] S. Grover and S. Basu, “Measuring Student Learning in Introductory Block-Based 

Programming: Examining Misconceptions of Loops, Variables, and Boolean Logic.” 2017. 
[43] J. Moreno-León, G. Robles, and M. Román-González, “Dr. Scratch: Automatic analysis of 

scratch projects to assess and foster computational thinking,” RED Rev. Educ. Distancia, no. 
46, pp. 1–23, 2015. 

[44] M. Román-González, J.-C. Pérez-González, and C. Jiménez-Fernández, “Which cognitive 
abilities underlie computational thinking? Criterion validity of the Computational Thinking 
Test,” Comput. Hum. Behav., vol. 72, pp. 678–691, 2017. 

 
