Neural coding of variable song structure in the songbird
Xavier Hinaut, Aurore Cazala, Catherine del Negro

To cite this version:

Xavier Hinaut, Aurore Cazala, Catherine del Negro. Neural coding of variable song structure in the
songbird. EBM 2017 - European Birdsong Meeting, May 2017, Bordeaux, France. pp.1. ￿hal-01665824￿

HAL Id: hal-01665824

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01665824

Submitted on 17 Dec 2017

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Neural coding of variable
song structure in the songbird
Xavier Hinaut1234, Aurore Cazala1, Catherine Del Negro1
1 Université Paris Saclay, UMR 9197, Neuro-PSI, Orsay, France. 2 Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France. 3 LaBRI, UMR 5800, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, 
Université de Bordeaux, Talence, France. 4 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, CNRS, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Introduction

Songs and song-evoked responses of a single unit (bird S62)

Songbirds are an excellent model for exploring the neural coding of variable sequences of 
categorical acoustic elements. The domesticated canary, for instance, produce higly 
variable songs with complex transition rules between two consecutive acoustic elements. 
These transition rules are non-Markovian (i.e. the next acoustic element to be sung is 
dependent on several previous elements, not only the last one) [1].
In the HVC of Bengalese finches, Bouchard and Brainard [5] found that variations in 
responses to a given syllable could be explained by a positive linear dependence on the 
convergence probability of preceding sequences.
Here, we reanalyse data from [3] to see if similar findings could be found for canaries.

BOS transition rules (divergence)

Chunk

Chunk

1

2

3

4

END

5

6

7

8

END

9

10

11

Amplitude

BOS (Bird Own Song)

Goal

Our aim is to understand how complex song sequences produced by canaries are coded in 
a sensorimotor area, the HVC nucleus.

Frequency (Hz)

Motor pathway

Learning pathway

HVC

RA

DLM

DM

nXIIts

LMAN

Area X

The HVC (somehow analogous to vocal premotor cortical areas) participates in generating 
temporal organization of acoustic elements within songs [2].
In the HVC of canaries, most of cells show auditory responses and are selective for the 
bird's own song (BOS) over its temporal variants (with a different order of acoustic 
elements) [3], but how the sequential structure (ordering of acoustic elements) is coded is 
poorly understood.

HYPOTHESIS
HVC neurons encode all or a subset of syntax features of the songs heard.

Song structure and ways to explore it

D(xy) = 0.5

X

Y

B

N

C(xy) = 1.0

X

Y

B

N

A

C

A

C

M

O

M

O

Divergence
Probability

Convergence
Probability

X

Y

M

N

O

Y

X

A

B

C

D(xy) = P(Y|X)

C(xy) = P(X|Y)

given 'X' what is the
probability that 'Y' follows?

given 'Y' what is the
probability that 'X' precedes?

Each canary has a specific repertoire composed of 15-35 distincs syllables (acoustic 
elements organized into sequences). According to [1], sequences of acoustic elements in 
canary songs show long-distance dependencies (e.g. "chunks").

No correlation found btw responses and prob. div./conv.

Z-score vs. Probability
We found no correlation between phrases neuronal responses (firing rate or Z-score) for 
the BOS or the randomized song and their probability of divergence and convergence. 
Below: the Z-score for 5 units of one bird (S62) given probability of divergence (left) and 
convergence (right).

e
r
o
c
s
-
Z

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Divergence Probability (order 1)

e
r
o
c
s
-
Z

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

References

[1] Markovitz et al., PLoS Comp. Bio. (2013).
[2] Hahnloser et al., Nature (2002).
[3] Lehongre & Del Negro, Neurosci. (2011).
[4] Fujimoto et al., J. Neuro (2011).
[5] Bouchard & Brainard, J. Neuro. (2013).

0.2

0.0
1.0
Convergence Probability (order 1)

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.5

0

−0.5

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

2

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Syllable

8

9

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Phrase

6

8

Raster

Phrase id

Time (sec)

PSTH

Phrase id

Time (sec)

Time (sec)

BOS

Z-Score
P. Divergence (order 1)
P. Convergence (order 1)

1.0

0.5

0.0

1

2 3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11

Randomized song

Probabilities of divergence and convergence 
are "flat" (equal to zero for all song), but Z-
score is not "flat".

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

)
z
H

(

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

0.5

0

−0.5

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

Randomized song

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

8

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

6
Raster

2 Phrase id

PSTH

Phrase id

Current work: studying responses to chunk modifications

In a new study, we recorded auditory responses in HVC of anesthetized canaries using 
multi-electrods arrays (8 or 16). We used as auditory stimuli the bird's own song (BOS) and 
modified versions of the BOS, in which we manipulated either the local or global structure. 
We reversed the position of two consecutive elements (local) or reordered parts of the 
song (global).

Original song (BOS 1)

A B C D E F G H I J

#1

#2

#3

Local modification

Global modification

A C B D E F G H I J

A B C E D F G H I J

A B C D E F G I H J

A D E F G H I B C J

X

X

A F G H I B C D E J

Similar song (BOS 2)

A B C B C D E F G M

Acknowledgments
The work was supported by Project IDEX NeuroSaclay "From Sequence Learning to Language Acquisition". We 
would 
from http://
quantum.opticsolomouc.org/archives/1026 under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.

for his help and advises. Poster 

thank Nicolas Giret 

template 

inspired 

like 

to 

Contacts
xavier.hinaut@inria.fr, {aurore.cazala; catherine.del-negro}@u-psud.fr

 
