Setting A Behavioral Task For Assessing Decision
Making In Urodele Amphibian
Charlotte Héricé, Manon Bonnet-Save, André Garenne, Jean-Marie

Cabelguen, Thomas Boraud

To cite this version:

Charlotte Héricé, Manon Bonnet-Save, André Garenne, Jean-Marie Cabelguen, Thomas Boraud. Set-
ting A Behavioral Task For Assessing Decision Making In Urodele Amphibian. Fifth Symposium on
Biology of Decision-Making (SBDM 2015), May 2015, Paris, France. . ￿hal-01206505￿

HAL Id: hal-01206505

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01206505

Submitted on 29 Sep 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Setting A Behavioral Task For Assessing
Decision Making In Urodele Amphibian
1,3,4,
Charlotte HÉRICÉ

1,3,4, Manon BONNET-SAVE

1,2,4, André GARENNE

Jean-Marie CABELGUEN

2,4, Thomas BORAUD

1,2,4

INTRODUCTION
Decision making implies cortical-basal ganglia (BG) loops, but the respective roles of each structure are still debated. Urodeles, by their similitude with mammals
in BG organisation, offer a much less level of complexity in understanding this process by the presence of fewer neurons. Therefore, we decided to set up a
behavioral test of decision making in this animal. Moreover, their regenerative capacities make them a unique model to study post-lesional plasticity of this
process networks. To our knowledge, urodele is the earliest group of limbed vertebrates in which decision-making has been successfully addressed yet.

BEHAVIORAL TEST
Animals have been trained in associating a polar-
ized light direction to the position of an obscure
shelter [1]. Then they were tested according to the
feature of the light (non polarized light, NPL; po-
larized light, PL). Note that the direction of the po-
larization and the N-S direction of the magnetic
ﬁeld were perpendicularly oriented, both during
training and test.

Training tank. Animals were housed under a 12h:12h
polarized light:dark cycle and trained 4 times a day dur-
ing 3 weeks.

ANIMALS
All the experiments were performed on fully metamorphosed amphibian urodeles (Pleurodeles waltlii)
(13 months post-hatching). We used 20 animals for the behavioral test and 7 for the DA system lesion
(preliminary results obtained for 2 out 7 animals are reported).

DOPAMINERGIC SYSTEM LESION

The animals were deeply anaesthetised via immersion in a 0.1% aqueous
solution of tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222). The micro-pipette con-
taining a 6-OHDA solution was inserted into the brain through a small
hole surgically drilled at the junction of the parietal and frontal bones in
the cranial midline.

Injection site [3]. The red dot indicates the 6-OHDA injection site, directly into
the third ventricle at the level of diencephalic/mesencephalic dopaminergic (DA)
neurons.

Identiﬁcation of DA neurons : Immunohistochemi-
cal identiﬁcation.OT: Optic Tectum. DA-Mb: DA cells
groups of the midbrain. Antibodies raised against tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH). The study will be focused on the ven-
tral diencephalic/mesencephalic TH+ cells, which are con-
sistently affected by 6-OHDA administration in the third
ventricle.

Test arena. Testing sessions occurred once a day and
by 3 tries for each tested condition.

The number of successive steps during each walking episode (A) and the step duration (C) were mesured
for each animal before, 7 days and 10 or 13 days after the 6-OHDA injection. A similar quantiﬁcation was
performed for swimming cycles (B, D).

Results ﬁeld reresentation. Polarized light vector
(blue arrow) and terrestrial magnetic orientation (red
arrow).

Angle occurrence probability. Following training,
the number of animals in the success zone is increased,
showing that training is effective.

REFERENCES

The effect of 6-OHDA. The 6-OHDA lesion induced clear short-term effects on the walking behavior. By

contrast, the swimming behavior seemed unaffected.

FUTURE DIRECTION

This paradigm gives us access to a motor decision making mode. In a second step, we will perform
selective electrical lesions of the pallium (i.e. the cortex in lower vertebrates), the thalamus and the basal
ganglia to determine the respective role of each structure. We will then study implication of dopamine in
this behavioral task by 6-OHDA lesions.

INSTITUTES
1 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, CNRS UMR 5293,
Bordeaux, France
2 Institut François Magendie, INSERM U862, Bordeaux, France
3 Équipe Mnémosyne INRIA, Talence, France 4 Université de
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France

SOURCES

Video recordings are available by
ﬂashing the QR-code. Mail contact:
charlotte.herice@u-bordeaux.fr

[1] Taylor & al. Spatial Orientation by Salamanders Using Plane-Polarized Light, 2007 In Science, 181, 285-287
[2] Retailleau & al. Why am I lost without dopamine? Effects of 6-OHDA lesion on the encoding of reward and decision process in CA3, 2013 In Neurobiology of Disease, 59,151–164
[3] Parish & al. Midbrain dopaminergic neurogenesis and behavioural recovery in a salamander lesion-induced regeneration model, 2007 In Development and Disease, 134, 2881-2887
[4] Nieuwenhuys & al. The central nervous system of vertebrates, 1998 In Edition Springer, Volume 2, chapter 18

