Identification of distinct pathological signatures induced
by patient-derived α-synuclein structures in nonhuman
primates
Mathieu Bourdenx, Aurélien Nioche, Sandra Dovero, Marie-Laure Arotcarena,

Sandrine M. J. Camus, Gregory Porras, Marie-Laure Thiolat, Nicolas P.

Rougier, Alice Prigent, Philippe Aubert, et al.

To cite this version:

Mathieu Bourdenx, Aurélien Nioche, Sandra Dovero, Marie-Laure Arotcarena, Sandrine M. J. Camus,
et al.. Identification of distinct pathological signatures induced by patient-derived α-synuclein struc-
tures in nonhuman primates. Science Advances , 2020, 6 (20), pp.eaaz9165. ￿10.1126/sciadv.aaz9165￿.
￿hal-02611441￿

HAL Id: hal-02611441

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02611441

Submitted on 18 May 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 
16 

17 

18 

19 
20 

21 
22 

23 

24 
25 

26 
27 

28 
29 

30 
31 

32 

33 
34 

35 
36 

37 
38 

39 

40 

Identification of distinct pathological signatures induced by patient-derived a-

synuclein structures in non-human primates 

Authors : M. Bourdenx1,2,†,‡, A. Nioche1,2,3,4,†, S. Dovero1,2,†, M.-L. Arotcarena1,2,†, S. Camus1,2, 

G. Porras1,2, M.-L. Thiolat1,2, N. P. Rougier1,2,5, A. Prigent6, P. Aubert6, S. Bohic7, C. Sandt8, F. 

Laferrière1,2, E. Doudnikoff1,2, N. Kruse9, B. Mollenhauer9, S. Novello10,11, M. Morari10,11, T. Leste-

Lasserre12, I. Trigo Damas13,14, M. Goillandeau1,2, C. Perier14,15, C. Estrada16,17, N. Garcia-

Carrillo18, A. Recasens14,15, N. N. Vaikath19, O. M. A. El-Agnaf19, M. Trinidad Herrero16,17, P. 

Derkinderen6, M. Vila14,15,20,21, J. A. Obeso13,14, B. Dehay1,2,\* § and E. Bezard1,2,\*§ 

Affiliations: 

1 Univ. de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, F-33000 Bordeaux, France; 

2 CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, F-33000 Bordeaux, France; 

3 Institut Jean Nicod, Département d’études cognitives, ENS, EHESS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, 
France; 

4 Institut Jean Nicod, Département d’études cognitives, CNRS, UMR 8129; 

5 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 33405 Talence, France; 

6 Inserm, U913, Nantes F-44035, France; Nantes University, Nantes F-44035, France; CHU Nantes, Department 
of Neurology, Nantes F-44093, France; 

7EA-7442 Rayonnement Synchrotron et Recherche Medicale, RSRM,University of Grenoble Alpes , 38000 
Grenoble, France ; 

8 SMIS beamline, Synchrotron SOLEIL, l’orme des merisiers, 91192 Gif sur Yvette, France; 

9Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Kassel, Germany; University Medical Center Goettingen, Institute of Neuropathology, 
Goettingen, Germany; 

10Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Pharmacology, University of Ferrara, via Fossato di Mortara 17-
19, 44121 Ferrara, Italy; 

11Neuroscience Center and National Institute of Neuroscience, University of Ferrara, via Fossato di Mortara 17-
19, 44121 Ferrara, Italy; 

12INSERM, Neurocentre Magendie, U1215, Physiopathologie de la Plasticité Neuronale, F-33000 Bordeaux, 
France; 

13HM CINAC, HM Puerta del Sur and CEU-San Pablo University Madrid, E-28938 Mostoles, Spain; 

14Center for Networked Biomedical Research on Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED), Instituto Carlos III, 
Spain; 

15Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Group, Vall d’Hebron Research Institute (VHIR)-Center for Networked 
Biomedical Research on Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED), Barcelona, Spain; 

16Clinical and Experimental Neuroscience Unit, School of Medicine, Biomedical Research Institute of Murcia 
(IMIB), University of Murcia, Campus Mare Nostrum, 30071 Murcia, Spain; 

17Institute of Research on Aging, School of Medicine, University of Murcia, 30071 Murcia, Spain; 

18Centro Experimental en Investigaciones Biomédica (CEIB), Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain; 

 
 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

19Neurological Disorders Research Center, Qatar Biomedical Research Institute (QBRI), Hamad Bin Khalifa 
University (HBKU), Education City, Qatar; 

20Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, 
Spain; 

21Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. 

\*To whom correspondence should be addressed to: Dr. Benjamin Dehay and to Dr. Erwan Bezard, Institute of 

Neurodegenerative Diseases, Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR 5293, Centre Broca Nouvelle-Aquitaine, 146 

rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux cedex, France. E-mail: benjamin.dehay@u-bordeaux.fr (B.D.) and 

erwan.bezard@u-bordeaux.fr (E.B.) 

† These authors contributed equally to this work 

§ BD and EB are co-last authors 

‡ Present address: Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology. 

1300 Morris Park Ave. Bronx, NY, 10461, USA. 

41 
42 

43 
44 

45 
46 

47 

48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

53 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

60 

61 

62 

63 

64 

65 

66 

67 

68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

73 

ABSTRACT 

Dopaminergic neuronal cell death, associated with intracellular α-synuclein (α-syn)-rich protein 

aggregates (termed ‘Lewy bodies’), is a well-established characteristic of Parkinson’s disease. 

Much evidence, accumulated from multiple experimental models has suggested that α-syn plays a 

role in PD pathogenesis, not only as a trigger of pathology but also as a mediator of disease 

progression through pathological spreading. Here we have used a machine learning-based approach 

to identify unique signatures of neurodegeneration in monkeys induced by distinct α-syn pathogenic 

structures derived from PD patients. Unexpectedly, our results show that, in non-human primates, 

a small amount of singular α-syn aggregates is as toxic as larger amyloid fibrils present in the LBs, 

thus reinforcing the need for preclinical research in this species. Furthermore, our results provide 

evidence supporting the true multifactorial nature of PD as multiple causes can induce similar 

outcome regarding dopaminergic neurodegeneration. 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 

81 

82 

83 

84 

85 

86 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

INTRODUCTION 

The seminal work of Braak and colleagues suggesting that Lewy body (LB) pathology follows a 

predictable pattern of progression within the brain in Parkinson’s disease (PD) (1) as well as the 

‘host-to-graft’ observation (2-4) led to the development of experimental models based on injection 

with a-synuclein (a-syn – the primary protein component of LB) assemblies (5-7). These 

experimental models suggest that a-syn, in pathological conformations such as the one found in 

LBs, initiates a cascade of events leading to dopaminergic neuron degeneration as well as cell-to-

cell propagation of a-syn pathology through a self-templating mechanism. 

Several studies have suggested that pre-fibrillar oligomers may represent one of the major 

neurotoxic entities in PD (8, 9). This notion has been derived primarily from studies using large 

doses of recombinant a-syn applied to cell cultures or injected into adult mice, over-expressing 

either mutant or wild-type a-syn (10). In agreement with these findings, we have shown that 

intracerebral injection of low doses of α-syn-containing LB extracts, purified from the substantia 

nigra, pars compacta (SNpc) of postmortem PD brains, promotes α-syn pathology and 

dopaminergic neurodegeneration in wild-type mice and non-human primates (11). Importantly, this 

neuropathological effect was directly linked to the presence of a-syn in LB extracts, since immuno-

depletion of α-syn from the LB fractions prevented the development of pathology following 

injection into wild-type mice. 

In this study, our aim was to thoroughly investigate this experimental model of synucleinopathy in 

non-human primates. The initial study design was to administrate fractions derived from the same 

PD patients containing either soluble and small a-syn aggregates (hereafter named noLB) or LB-

type aggregates (hereafter named LB). However, because of the unexpected finding that non-

human primates, unlike mice, are susceptible to soluble or finely granular a-syn, we sought to 

elucidate the response characteristics induced by either LB or noLB fractions. To achieve a 

thorough analysis of these a-syn-related characteristics, we took advantage of the strength of 

machine-learning algorithms for discovering fine patterns among complex sets of data and 

developed a new method compatible with the constraints of experimental biology. We here report 

the identification of primate-specific responses to selected a-syn assemblies associated with 

different pathogenic mechanisms. Overall, our results support the concept of the multifactorial 

nature of synucleinopathies. 

87 
88 
89 

90 

91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99 

100 

101 

102 

103 

104 

105 

106 

107 

108 

109 

110 

111 

112 

113 

114 

115 

116 

117 

118 

119 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

120 
121 

122 

123 

124 

125 

126 

127 

128 

129 

130 

131 

132 

133 

134 

135 

136 

137 

138 

139 

140 

141 

142 

143 

144 

145 

146 

147 

148 

149 

150 

151 

152 

RESULTS 
Purification and characterization of α-synuclein extracts from PD patients 

NoLB and LB fractions were obtained from the SNpc of five sporadic PD brains exhibiting 

conspicuous LB pathology. The samples were processed through differential ultracentrifugation in 

a sucrose gradient, and analyzed for the presence of α-syn aggregates by filter retardation assay 

(Fig. 1A) (11). Further characterization of noLB and LB fractions was performed by co-localization 

of α-syn and the amyloid dye Thioflavin S (Fig. 1B) as well as ultrastructural examination by 

electron microscopy (Fig. 1C). These assays confirmed the presence of misfolded a-syn in both 

fractions. We also performed biochemical characterization of the stability of assemblies after 

proteinase K digestion (Fig. 1D) and detergent treatments (Fig. 1E) followed by a-syn dot-blot 

assays. While total α-syn content was comparable between selected fractions (as measured by α-

syn ELISA), LB fractions showed higher resistance to proteinase K treatment (noLB 

t1/2=15.23minutes vs LB t1/2>60minutes) (Fig. 1D) as well as greater resistance to multiple 

detergents, including 8M Urea (Fig. 1E). We then measured the content of a-syn aggregates using 

human a-syn aggregation TR-FRET-based immunoassay, which revealed a significantly higher 

amount of aggregated a-syn in LB fractions (Fig. 1F). To obtain insight into the content of 

monomeric and aggregated a-syn within noLB and LB fractions of PD patients, sarkosyl treatment 

was applied to both fractions to induce physical separation, and then velocity sedimentation and 

density floatation gradients were performed to quantify these two respective populations and 

determine their relative abundance in each fraction (Fig. S1 A-H). Strikingly, while LB fractions 

contained ~90% of aggregated a-syn, noLB fractions were composed of ~10% of this pathological 

form of the protein (Fig. S1 I). Also, in order to confirm the quality of the LB extraction, we 

performed a filter retardation assay which showed that LB fractions, but not noLB fractions, were 

highly enriched in known components of LBs, such as phosphorylated S129 a-syn, ubiquitin, p62, 

hyperphosphorylated tau and Ab (Fig. S2 A). 

Micro-Infrared Spectroscopy of LB and noLB fractions was performed to show conformational 

changes in amyloid structures at the molecular level (Fig. S2 B-E) and this confirmed the presence 

of b-sheet structures in both assemblies (Fig. S2 B-C). Although their velocity of sedimentation 

and density floatation characteristics were similar, the aggregates present in the LB and noLB 

fractions were different in nature based upon the evidence of Micro-Infrared Spectroscopy. 

Principal component analysis (PCA) showed that, in the LB fractions, large aggregates 

corresponding to the major pieces of LB were present (Fig. S2D, cluster on the right). PCA further 

showed that, in the range of 1,590-1,700 cm-1, the LB group contained a fraction of amyloid 

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

153 

154 

155 

156 

157 

158 

159 

160 

161 

162 

163 

164 

165 

166 

167 

168 

169 

170 

171 

172 

173 

174 

175 

176 

177 

178 

179 

180 

181 

182 

183 

184 

185 

aggregates with different amyloid structures from those in the noLB group as they clearly 

segregated by PCA in two clusters (Fig. S2 D-E). Altogether, these results suggest that while LB 

fractions primarily contained large aggregated a-syn fibrils, noLB fractions contained soluble a-

syn and a smaller enrichment of a-syn aggregates featuring a specific amyloid structure not found 

in the LB fractions. 

Data from several studies suggest that both recombinant α-syn preformed fibrils (12-14) and 

patient-derived α-syn (11) can promote pathogenic templating of endogenous a-syn ultimately 

leading to dopaminergic neurodegeneration in SNpc. Following quantification by ELISA, both 

mixes of fraction were diluted to ~24 pg a-syn per microliter. Then, those fractions were tested for 

their pathogenic effects on TH-positive dopaminergic neurons in primary mesencephalic cultures 

(Fig. S3 A) as well as in vivo in wild-type mice. Four months after supranigral injection, LB-injected 

mice displayed, as expected, significant dopaminergic degeneration, while noLB injections in mice 

had no impact on dopaminergic neurons (Fig. 1G-H) as we have previously reported for other 

SNpc-derived LB fractions (11), thus validating the toxicity of the preparation prior to injection 

into non-human primates. 

Intrastriatal injection of LB and noLB fractions from Parkinson’s disease patients induces 

nigrostriatal neurodegeneration in baboon monkeys 

To determine the mechanisms of a-syn aggregates toxicity in a species closer to humans, adult 

baboon monkeys (n=4-7 per experimental group) received bilateral stereotaxic injections (100µl) 

of either LB or noLB fractions into the putamen before euthanasia 24 months post-injection. This 

time-frame was chosen based on our previous studies indicating that after 14 months post-injection, 

ongoing pathogenic effects can already be measured, and was extended to potentially reach disease-

relevant lesions. Two years after administration, LB-injected monkeys displayed significant striatal 

dopaminergic terminal loss both in the putamen and in the caudate nucleus, accompanied by a 

significant decrease in tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactivity in the substantia nigra pars 

compacta (SNpc) (Fig. 2). Stereological counts showed that LB-injected animals exhibited TH-

positive and Nissl-positive cell loss in the SNpc (16% and 23%, respectively). No overt 

parkinsonism was observed, however, since the extent of the lesion remained below the threshold 

for symptom appearance; i.e. 45% of cell loss (15), compared to an age-matched control group. 

At odds with mice either generated for the purpose of this study (Fig. 1G-H), previously published 

(11), or produced in the context of other in-house studies (data not shown), noLB-injected monkeys 

showed degeneration of the nigrostriatal pathway including dopaminergic cell loss (i.e. 16% of TH-

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

186 

187 

188 

189 

190 

191 

192 

193 

194 

195 

196 

197 

198 

199 

200 

201 

202 

203 

204 

205 

206 

207 

208 

209 

210 

211 

212 

213 

214 

215 

216 

217 

218 

positive neurons and 28% of Nissl-positive neurons quantified by stereology), similar to that 

observed in LB-injected monkeys (Fig. 2). Facing such an unexpected finding, we aimed to identify 

specific characteristics of the pathological mechanisms involved in a-syn toxicity induced by each 

fraction independently, using a large-scale approach in combination with machine learning for 

pattern identification. 

Machine-learning algorithm predicts nigrostriatal degeneration 

We performed an exploratory approach and aimed to distinguish relevant variables allowing 

accurate prediction of neurodegeneration (i.e., to operate a feature selection). Overall, we 

investigated a large number of variables tapping on behavioral, histological, biochemical, 

transcriptional and biophysical approaches (Fig. 3A) applied to several brain areas (n=40 – Fig. 

3B), totalizing 180 variables measured for each individual (Fig. S4A for variable abbreviation 

nomenclature; Table S1 for exhaustive list of variables; Table S2 features all raw data). We first 

extracted from this dataset, every variable that actually quantified neurodegeneration (i.e. 

dopaminergic markers such as TH or dopamine transporter by immunohistochemistry), ending up 

with 163 variables per animal. 

Then, to operate feature selection, we designed a distributed algorithm using multiple layer 

perceptron (MLP) (Bourdenx and Nioche, 2018), a classic machine-learning algorithm based on 

artificial neural network that is able to approximate virtually any functions (Hornik et al., 1989). 

This algorithm was given, as input, the data obtained for each animal for the 163 aforementioned 

variables and its output is a rank of these variables regarding their ability to predict three indicators 

of dopaminergic tract integrity; that were levels of tyrosine hydroxylase staining in (i) the SNpc, 

(ii) the putamen and (iii) the caudate nucleus. 

The main difficulty was to overcome the large number of input variables (163) compared to the 

sample size (n=4-7 per group), which can induce a selection and reporting bias (Kuncheva and 

Rodriguez, 2018). In order to tackle this “p > n” problem, instead of using a single network that 

could be prone to overfitting, we put in competition several networks. 

Each MLP was composed of a single hidden layer of 3 neurons (Fig. 3C). It has as input a subset 

of 3 variables (out of the 163) and as output the 3 indicators of dopaminergic tract integrity. In total, 

we used 708,561 sets of 3 inputs variables. Every instance of MLP was trained with 80% of our 

sample (always a combination of control and injected animals) and tested on the remaining 20%. 

The performance of each set of 3 input variables was evaluated according to the difference between 

the predicted values of TH staining and the actual ones. 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

219 

220 

221 

222 

223 

224 

225 

226 

227 

228 

229 

230 

231 

232 

233 

234 

235 

236 

237 

238 

239 

240 

241 

242 

243 

244 

245 

246 

247 

248 

249 

250 

251 

252 

We focused on the top 1% of the best networks and counted the occurrence of each of the 163 

variables in the subset of 3 variables used by these best networks (Fig. 3C). We ranked each variable 

according to the number of occurrences (Fig. 3C) for LB- (Fig. 3D) and noLB-injected animals 

(Fig. 3E) independently. 

In order to avoid possible overfitting, we used several methods in combination. First, we performed 

cross-validation by splitting the dataset into two parts: a training and a testing set of data. 80% of 

the data were randomly selected to train the networks (and independently for each network), while 

the 20% remaining were used to evaluate the networks. Then, in order to evaluate the robustness of 

the quality of prediction for a given set, we repeated this cross-validation step 50 times for every 

set of 3 input variables (each network was trained and tested using a different partition of the dataset 

- total number of network: 35,428,050). Lastly, we generated random data and used them as input 

for the MLP. As expected, performances were significantly lower compared to our actual dataset 

(Fig. S4B, C). 

Overall, this unique approach allowed us to rank input variables according to their explanatory 

power and therefore to extract the strongest predictors of neurodegeneration for each experimental 

group. Interestingly, despite similar levels of nigrostriatal degeneration between LB- and noLB-

injected animals (Fig. 2B), the algorithm allowed us to identify differential variable sorting patterns 

(Fig. 3D-E). 

MLP-derived signatures can identify unique characteristics between experiment group 

Next, we compared the LB and noLB characteristics using the rank-rank hypergeometric overlap 

(RRHO) test (Fig. 4A). Interestingly, low similarity was observed for the highly ranked variables 

suggesting specific differences in the biological response to the injection of LB or noLB (Fig. 4B). 

Focusing on the 20 first variables that showed low similarity between groups, we found that LB-

exposed monkeys were characterized by both quantitative and qualitative changes in a-syn levels 

(i.e. phosphorylation at Ser129 and aggregation) especially in cortical areas corroborated by distinct 

methodologies as well as by a dysfunctional equilibrium in neurochemistry of basal ganglia output 

structures classically associated with parkinsonism (16, 17) (Fig. 4C – Fig. S5). Conversely, noLB-

exposed monkeys exhibited more diverse nigrostriatal-centric characteristics with variables related 

to a-syn aggregation, proteostasis and Zn homeostasis (Fig. 4D - Fig. S6). Together, we identified 

specific properties for both groups with limited overlap (35% - 7/20 variables) for an identical level 

of degeneration. 

Retrospective literature search validates MLP derived signatures 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

253 

254 

255 

256 

257 

258 

259 

260 

261 

262 

263 

264 

265 

266 

267 

268 

269 

270 

271 

272 

273 

274 

275 

276 

277 

278 

279 

280 

281 

282 

283 

284 

285 

286 

We next used a retrospective analysis to validates the relevance of the MLP-derived signature in 

PD. Although, some variables have never been investigated in the context of PD, others have been 

studied and reports exists in the literature. For instance, the amount of phosphorylated Ser129 α-

synuclein in the entorhinal (h.psyn.ctx.er.ant) and parahippocampal (h.psyn.ctx.phipp) cortex - 1st 

and 2nd best predictors for the LB group – have been already associated with PD pathology. Studies 

of post-mortem brains from PD patients revealed the presence of LB in these regions which was 

correlated with disease progression(18) and predicted cognitive deficit in PD patients (19). 

Interestingly, the anterior entorhinal cortex has also been shown to be affected by severe α-syn 

pathology, related to olfactory dysfunction in prodromal phases of PD pathology (20). In addition, 

increased of levels of phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn in sensorimotor (h.syn.ctx.sma.ant) and 

cingulate cortices (h.syn.ctx.cg.ant), shared by both LB and noLB signatures, have already been 

reported by our group in an independent cohort of non-human primates (11). 

Both LB and noLB signatures, and especially noLB, showed that variables related to a-syn 

aggregation status were among the best predictors (LB: 1 in top10 best predictors; noLB 3 in top10 

best predictors). This was highly expected from the literature as α-syn aggregation has been 

associated with PD pathology (21). 

Variables related to the proteostasis network (levels of the lysosomal receptor LAMP2 – 

wb.lamp2.sn - 6th or amount of ubiquinated proteins – wb.ub.sn – 9th) were more specifically 

associated with the noLB signature. This is of high interest as proteostasis defect is more and more 

considered as a key step in pathogenicity (22-24). 

Levels of the microglia marker, IbaI, was ranked as the third best predictor of neurodegeneration 

in the LB signature. Microglial inflammatory response was shown to be implicated in 

neurodegeneration in many animal models, including α-syn overexpressing and toxin-based animal 

model of PD (25). 

Lastly, postmortem analysis of Zn2+ concentration in the brains of PD patients has shown elevated 

levels in the striatum and SNpc (26). Conversely, a recent meta-analysis showed a decrease of 

circulating Zn2+ levels in PD patients (27). In experimental models of PD, Zn2+ accumulation has 

been associated with dopaminergic degeneration in rodent exposed to mitochondrial toxins (28, 

29). 

Experimental confirmation of MLPs’ prediction 

We aimed to confirm the relevance of the top first MLP selected variables. Since the LB signature 

was associated with changes in a-syn phosphorylation in cortical areas, we analyzed side-by-side 

the levels of a-syn and phosphorylated Ser129 a-syn in 18 brain regions (Fig. 5A). Interestingly, 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

287 

288 

289 

290 

291 

292 

293 

294 

295 

296 

297 

298 

299 

300 

301 

302 

303 

304 

305 

306 

307 

308 

309 

310 

311 

312 

313 

314 

315 

316 

317 

318 

319 

in agreement with the LB signature obtained from the MLP, LB-injected monkeys displayed a 

stronger accumulation of phosphorylated Ser129 a-syn compared to noLB-injected animals (Fig. 

5A-B). Also, the 2 most enriched variables of the LB signature (i.e. phosphorylated a-syn levels in 

parahippocampal and entorhinal cortices (Fig. 4C)) showed significant negative correlations with 

degrees of degeneration (Fig. 5C-D), thus confirming their ability to predict neurodegeneration. 

Then, we decided to confirm the relevance of one of the strongest predictors, the levels of Zn2+ in 

the SNpc in independent experiments. First, we observed a significant increase of Zn2+ in noLB-

injected mice compared to sham-injected or LB-injected mice (Fig. S7A). Second, we analyzed the 

levels of Zn2+ in LB-injected macaque monkeys from a previous study of our laboratory (11). 

Interestingly, despite the fact that these experiments were done in a different non-human primate 

sub specie, injection of LB in the putamen (similar to the present study) or above the SNpc (different 

from the present study) induced elevation of Zn2+ levels in the SNpc, as measured by SR-XRF (Fig. 

S7B). Of note, the dimension of the effect was similar across studies (Fig. S7E). Then, to 

understand whether that modulation Zn2+ levels was specific to our experimental paradigm, we 

measured Zn2+ levels in the context of adeno-associated virus-mediated overexpression of mutant 

human a-syn in both rats and marmoset monkeys (30) using the same methodology (Fig. S7C, D). 

Here, overexpression of a-syn did not triggered accumulation of Zn2+ in the SNpc (despite inducing 

dopaminergic neurodegeneration – (30) suggesting that this phenomenon is specific to seeding 

experiment paradigms. 

Lastly, we analyzed a publicly available cortical proteomic database of healthy individual and PD 

patients. Of interest, we observed that several Zn2+ transporters were elevated in the brains of PD 

patients thus suggesting a zinc dyshomeostasis in patients (Fig. S7F). Indeed, plasma membrane 

transporters such as the zinc transporter 1 (ZnT1), the Zrt-/Irt-like protein 6 (ZIP6) and ZIP10 

showed increased levels (Fig. S7G-I) while the synaptic vesicle membrane transporter ZnT3 

remained constant (Fig. S7J). 

Association metric shows independence of strong predictors 

As we used combinations of 3 variables and because of the structure of MLPs, one could expect 

that some combinations would complement each other 

to allow finer prediction of 

neurodegeneration levels. To address this question, we used a classic measurement of association 

in the field of data-mining: lift (31) and plotted the results as network plots showing association 

(edge size) and enrichment in the best learners (node size). Lift calculation was corrected for error 

prediction to avoid detrimental association between variables. The first observation was that the 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

most enriched variables (top 3 to 5) appeared to be self-sufficient to predict the neurodegeneration 

levels with minimal error (Fig. 6). Some variables, with modest enrichment, showed strong positive 

associations that were specific to each experimental group. Associated variables in LB-injected 

monkeys were: (i) α-syn-related parameters along the SNpc-striatum-cortex axis, an impairment of 

locomotion and the ethologically-defined orientation of the animals towards their environment (Fig. 

6 top left inset); (ii) oligomeric α-syn species measured in the midbrain and striatum equally 

associated, but to lesser extent, with a-syn levels in cortex and plasma (Fig. 6 top right inset). 

In noLB-injected animals, the analysis shed light upon the relative abundance of two members of 

the macroautophagy pathway (Fig. 6B top left) as well as the balance between monomeric and high-

molecular weight species of a-syn in the putamen (Fig. 6B bottom right). Such disruption of the 

nigrostriatal pathway has repercussions upon the basal ganglia physiology as GABA levels in their 

output structure, the internal globus pallidus, was associated with a decreased social behavior (Fig. 

6B bottom left inset). 

320 

321 

322 

323 

324 

325 

326 

327 

328 

329 

330 

331 

332 

333 

334 

DISCUSSION 

335 

336 

337 

338 

339 

340 

341 

342 

343 

344 

345 

346 

347 

348 

349 

350 

351 

In the present study, we report that, in non-human primates, injection of distinct a-syn assemblies 

derived from PD patients lead to dopaminergic degeneration through discrete mechanisms. 

Applying a machine-learning method, we gained insight into unique signatures of degeneration 

induced by injection of two distinct a-syn pathogenic assemblies (i.e. those contained in the LB 

and noLB fractions derived from idiopathic PD patients’ brains). To do so, we built a large dataset 

with 180 variables obtained from behavioral, histological, biochemical, transcriptional and 

biophysical approaches applied to several brain areas for each individual. By using a distributed 

MLP algorithm that we developed for the purpose of this study, we identified characteristics that 

give insight into the strongest predictors of neurodegeneration for each experimental group. We 

have, therefore, described for the first time that distinct a-syn assemblies leading to similar 

degeneration in monkeys are associated with different mechanisms, hence experimentally 

confirming the true multifactorial nature of synucleinopathies. 

Our results illustrate that both small oligomeric as well as larger a-syn assemblies induce 

dopaminergic degeneration in non-human primates. This finding was unexpected, since previous 

mouse studies from our laboratory showed that noLB injection did not have any observable 

consequence regarding dopaminergic degeneration, a-syn accumulation or phosphorylation (11). 

In agreement, other groups also showed the absence of toxicity of soluble recombinant a-syn (12). 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

352 

353 

354 

355 

356 

357 

358 

359 

360 

361 

362 

363 

364 

365 

366 

367 

368 

369 

370 

371 

372 

373 

374 

375 

376 

377 

378 

379 

380 

381 

382 

383 

384 

One possible explanation is that primate dopaminergic neurons could be highly susceptible to a-

syn toxicity. This could be in part due to their unique cellular architecture (32), a feature already 

known to contribute to the selective vulnerability of these neurons in PD (33). In fact, the large and 

complex axonal arbor of dopamine neurons make them particularly vulnerable to factors that 

contribute to cell death and , in primates, this axonal arbor is ten-fold the size of that in rodents 

(32). In addition, primate dopamine neurons display unique molecular characteristics (e.g. the 

presence of neuromelanin, the intracellular levels of which have been shown to be important in the 

threshold for the initiation of PD) (34). These unique features of primate dopaminergic neurons 

might be important in explaining the toxic mechanisms of the relatively low content of a-syn 

aggregates in the noLB fractions. Additional studies are now needed to fully address the question 

of host-seed interactions, but our results highlight the relevance and the need of the non-human 

primate model for the study of synucleinopathies. 

We also confirmed that the toxicity mechanisms associated with patient-derived a-syn aggregates 

are shared features among patients and, therefore, common to the disease. Indeed, LB and noLB 

fractions used in this study were isolated from a pool of 5 patients who were different from the pool 

of 3 patients used in our previous study in mice (11). In the mice experiment (Fig. S3B) performed 

in this study, we observed the same level of dopaminergic degeneration (~40% at 4 months after 

injection). 

The surprising observation, in non-human primates, that the noLB fraction is toxic to the same 

extent as the LB fraction suggests the existence of previously unrecognized forms of a-syn toxicity. 

Several studies have suggested that pre-fibrillar oligomeric species are the toxic a-syn species (8, 

9). Our biochemical studies showed that noLB and LB fractions had different amyloid properties 

(Fig. 1), contents (Fig. S1, S2A) and structures (Fig. S2B-E). Indeed, LB fractions contained a 

majority of large aggregated a-syn fibrils as well as some smaller aggregates while noLB fractions 

contained a smaller proportion (10 folds) of smaller aggregates and soluble a-syn. More 

importantly, the smaller aggregates were different in nature between LB and noLB fractions, as 

shown by micro-infrared spectroscopy (Fig. S2B-E). One could hypothesize that the observed effect 

is due to a species common between LB and noLB. However, because of the extent of degeneration, 

which was similar between the two experimental groups, and the a-syn content dissimilarity, both 

in amount and nature, this appears very unlikely. We believe that our results support the notion of 

the existence of a range of a-syn pathogenic structures with distinct toxic properties within the PD 

brain. Further work is necessary to provide a complete structural characterization of those species. 

As yet, very few studies report the high-resolution structures of a-syn aggregates, which are on the 

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

385 

386 

387 

388 

389 

390 

391 

392 

393 

394 

395 

396 

397 

398 

399 

400 

401 

402 

403 

404 

405 

406 

407 

408 

409 

410 

411 

412 

413 

414 

415 

416 

one hand, only derived from studies using recombinant a-syn and, on the other hand, limited to 

near atomic resolution (35-37). Encouragingly, much effort is currently being devoted to this field 

of research and two recent studies reported the atomic structure of a-syn fibrils determined by cryo-

electron microscopy (38, 39), while still being limited to recombinant-generated a-syn, and not 

isolated from human brain tissue. 

In order to perform a characterization of the effects of the two fractions, we developed a machine 

learning method to identify their biological characteristics. It is now well accepted that machine 

learning algorithms can be trained to detect patterns as well as, or even better than, humans (40-

42). Instead of the classification algorithms (the algorithm learns to identify in which category a 

sample belongs) that were mostly used in recent applications of machine learning in biology (43), 

we chose in this study to predict continuous and biologically-relevant variables using MLPs. Our 

choice was motivated by the limited sample size that is often a constraint of experimental biology. 

Although it might have been possible to use other feature selection methods, the use of MLPs with 

a distributed architecture allowed us to avoid overfitting issues and to develop a method particularly 

well-suited for low sample size datasets (44). As both LB and noLB-injected monkeys displayed 

similar levels of degeneration, they were indistinguishable using that endpoint. Instead of using a 

clustering analysis or a classification method, hence making the a priori assumption that these 

groups where different, we preferred to submit the two experimental groups to the MLP 

independently. 

The combination of this constrained, distributed architecture and the holistic approach allowed us 

to rank input variables according to the number of times they appeared in the group of best 

predictors (defined as top 1% of best networks). A major issue in the use of machine learning in 

experimental biology in the ‘black-box’ is the fact that it is usually impossible to ‘understand’ how 

an algorithm predicted an output (45). By using a reverse engineering method, we aimed to tackle 

that issue. Because we explored all possible combinations of our variables, we could rank the input 

variables assuming that the more they appeared in the top 1%, the more they contained information 

allowing precise prediction of the neurodegeneration levels. Interestingly, our two experimental 

groups showed that some of the best predictors were similar (about 30%) but the majority were 

different. One could hypothesize that the similar variables between the two signatures probably 

embedded information that are consequences of neurodegeneration while the different ones 

probably contain information regarding the process of disease initiation and/or progression. Further 

experimental studies are now needed to confirm the relevance of these variables. 

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

417 

418 

419 

420 

421 

422 

423 

424 

425 

426 

427 

428 

429 

430 

431 

432 

433 

434 

435 

436 

437 

438 

439 

440 

441 

442 

443 

444 

445 

446 

447 

448 

449 

Also, as these two kinds of a-syn assemblies were associated with different signatures identified 

by our MLP approach, we propose that our results illustrate the multifactorial nature of the disease 

as different mechanisms (i.e. signatures) initiated by different triggers (i.e. a-syn assemblies) led 

to similar consequences (i.e. degeneration levels). 

Using this methodology, we confirmed the interest of highly-expected variables but more 

importantly also unexpected variables that appear to be excellent predictors of a-syn-associated 

dopaminergic degeneration. The first hit for LB-injected animals was phosphorylated a-syn in the 

entorhinal cortex (as we have previously shown) followed by phosphorylated a-syn in the para-

hippocampal cortex (unexpected), striatal microglial activation and GABA dysregulation in the 

internal part of the globus pallidus (expected) (Fig. S5). Conversely, Zn homeostasis was a strong 

predictive variable (unexpected) followed by a-syn aggregation-related terms (expected) in noLB-

injected animals (Fig. S6). 

In order to confirm the prediction made by the MLP approach, we first performed a retrospective 

literature analysis. This analysis showed that a significant part of the best predictors has been shown 

in the literature to be correlated with disease progression. Then, we attempted to confirm the interest 

of one of the top hits, the accumulation of Zn2+ in the SNpc, in independent experimental cohorts. 

Interestingly, we here describe that both in mice injected with noLB or in macaque monkeys (a 

different non-human primate sub species that the baboons used in that study) injected either in the 

striatum or in the SNpc, Zn levels were increased in the SNpc. However, in mice, Zn 

dyshomeostasis was not associated with neurodegeneration in the noLB group (at odds with what 

was observed in monkeys) suggesting a species difference in the relationship between zinc levels 

and dopaminergic tract integrity. Surprisingly, that result was not observed in rats and marmoset 

monkeys overexpressing human mutant a-syn. This observation might suggest that Zn 

dyshomeostasis is a feature of disease not triggered in the context of human mutant a-syn 

overexpression that is associated with fast progressing pathology (Bourdenx et al. 2015). Then, in 

order to expand our results to human pathology, we analyzed a publicly available proteomic dataset 

of human samples. According to that analysis, PD patients displayed increased levels of plasma 

membrane Zn transporters, hence suggesting a Zn dyshomeostasis in patients. In the context of PD, 

Zn dyshomeostasis has been associated with autophagy/lysosomal dysfunction in the context of 

PARK9 mutations (Ramirez et al. 2006, Dehay et al. 2012). Further studies are now needed to fully 

unravel this connection. 

Altogether, our findings show that primate dopaminergic neurons are sensitive to both small, mostly 

soluble, a-syn extracts as well as larger, aggregated, a-syn extracts derived from PD patients. These 

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

findings involve two immediate outcomes. First, since this toxicity has not been reported so far it 

suggest species differences that would need to be thoroughly investigated (46, 47) and calls for a 

systematic appraisal of proteinopathies in primates in particular for validating therapeutic strategies 

before clinical testing (48). Second, the present study highlights the complex structure-toxicity 

relationship of a-syn assemblies and corroborates the multifactorial origin of synucleinopathies as 

distinct assemblies can induce similar degeneration (that would probably lead to similar clinical 

manifestation in patients) through different mechanisms, nigrostriatal or extranigral brain 

pathways, calling for molecular diagnosis to identify patient sub-populations before launching 

large-scale, heterogeneous in nature, clinical trials. Finally, we developed a machine-learning 

approach allowing and quantitative assessment of the explanatory power of a given set of variables 

compatible with the constrained sample size of experimental biology. 

450 

451 

452 

453 

454 

455 

456 

457 

458 

459 

460 

461 

462 

 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

463 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

464 

465 

466 

467 

468 

469 

470 

471 

472 

473 

474 

475 

476 

477 

478 

479 

480 

481 

482 

483 

484 

485 

486 

487 

488 

489 

490 

491 

492 

493 

494 

495 

Access to data and machine-learning code for replicability and further use by the community 

The entire raw data set is made available to the readers (Table S2). Authors chose not to provide 

representative examples of each procedure for the sake of space and because the entire data set is 

fully disclosed. Further information and requests for examples should be directed to and will be 

fulfilled by 

the Corresponding Contacts. Hyperlink 

to 

the machine-learning code 

(10.5281/zenodo.1240558) is provided (https://zenodo.org/record/1240558#.XC8pqy17Su4). 

Ethics statement 

Experiments were performed in accordance with the European Union directive of September 22, 

2010 (2010/63/EU) on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes. The Animal 

Experimentation Ethical Committee (CEEA) of the Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR) 

approved experiments under the license number CEEA 81/13 (rats). The Institutional Animal Care 

and Ethical Committee of Bordeaux University (CE50, France) approved experiments under the 

license number 5012099-A (mice). The Institutional Animal Care and Ethical Committee of Murcia 

University (Spain) approved experiments under the license number REGA ES300305440012 

(monkeys). 

Animals and Stereotactic Injections 

Mice. Wild-type C57BL/6 mice (4 months old) received 2µl of either LB fractions or noLB 

fractions by stereotactic delivery to the region immediately above the right substantia nigra 

(coordinates from Bregma: AP=-2.9, L= -1,3, DV=-4.5) at a flow rate of 0.4µl/min and the pipette 

was left in place for 5 min after injection to avoid leakage. Mice were killed four months after 

injection. Ten to fifteen mice were used in each group. 

Monkeys. Animals, whuch were from the research animal facility of the University of Murcia 

(Murcia, Spain) and housed in 2 multi-male multi-female exterior pens, were studied in a breeding 

farm over 2 years (Murcia, Spain). Animals were fed fruits, vegetables and monkey pellets twice a 

day before 9 am and after 5pm. Water was available ad libitum. 17 healthy adult olive baboons 

(Papio papio) were used in this study. Group sizes were chosen assuming a one-tailed alpha of 0.05, 

with sample size of at least three per group, which provided >80% power to detect a difference 

between the treatment groups and the control group, using a Fisher’s exact test. Animals were 

randomized into treatment or control groups. Six baboons were used for LB injections, four were 

used for noLB injections and seven were untreated control animals. Intrastriatal injections of either 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

496 

497 

498 

499 

500 

501 

502 

503 

504 

505 

506 

507 

508 

509 

510 

511 

512 

513 

514 

515 

516 

517 

518 

519 

520 

521 

522 

523 

524 

525 

526 

527 

528 

529 

LB fractions or noLB fractions were performed at 2 rostrocaudal levels of the motor striatum 

(anterior commissure [AC], -1mm and -5mm) under stereotactic guidance as previously described 

(49-52) . The total injected volume per hemisphere was 100µl (2 injection sites with 50µl each at 

3µl/min at each location site). After each injection, the syringe was left in place for 10 min to 

prevent leakage along the needle track. A number of parameters were monitored during the course 

of the two-year study, including survival and clinical observations. At the end of the experiment 

(24 months post-injection), all monkeys were euthanised with pentobarbital overdose (150mg/kg 

i.v.), followed by perfusion with room-temperature 0.9% saline solution (containing 1% heparin) 

in accordance with accepted European Veterinary Medical Association guidelines. Brains were 

removed quickly after death. Each brain was then dissected along the midline and each hemisphere 

was divided into three parts. The left hemisphere was immediately frozen by immersion in 

isopentane at -50°C for at least 5 min and stored at -80°C. The right hemisphere was fixed for one 

week in 10 vol/tissue of 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C, cryoprotected in two successive gradients of 

20 then 30% sucrose in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) before being frozen by immersion in 

isopentane (-50°C) for at least 5 min and stored at -80°C until sectioning. CSF and blood samples 

(plasma, serum, whole blood) in the 17 animals were carefully collected before euthanasia. No 

samples were excluded from analysis in these studies. 

Purification of Lewy bodies from human PD Brains 

The samples were obtained from brains collected in a Brain Donation Program of the Brain Bank 

“GIE NeuroCEB” run by a consortium of Patients Associations: ARSEP (association for research 

on multiple sclerosis), CSC (cerebellar ataxias), France Alzheimer and France Parkinson. The 

consents were signed by the patients themselves or their next of kin in their name, in accordance 

with the French Bioethical Laws. The Brain Bank GIE NeuroCEB (Bioresource Research Impact 

Factor number BB-0033-00011) has been declared at the Ministry of Higher Education and 

Research and has received approval to distribute samples (agreement AC-2013-1887). Human 

SNpc was dissected from fresh frozen postmortem midbrain samples from 5 patients with sporadic 

PD exhibiting conspicuous nigral LB pathology on neuropathological examination (mean age at 

death: 75 ± 2.75 years; frozen post-mortem interval: 31.8 ± 7.45h; GIE Neuro-CEB BB-0033-

00011). Tissue was homogenized in 9 vol (w/v) ice-cold MSE buffer (10 mM MOPS/KOH, pH 7.4, 

1Msucrose, 1mM EGTA, and 1mMEDTA) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete Mini; 

Boehringer Mannheim) with 12 strokes of a motor-driven glass/teflon dounce homogenizer. For 

LB purification, a sucrose step gradient was prepared by overlaying 2.2 M with 1.4 M and finally 

with 1.2 M sucrose in volume ratios of 3.5:8:8 (v/v). The homogenate was layered on the gradient 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

530 

531 

532 

533 

534 

535 

536 

537 

538 

539 

540 

541 

542 

543 

544 

545 

546 

547 

548 

549 

550 

551 

552 

553 

554 

555 

556 

557 

558 

559 

560 

561 

562 

563 

and centrifuged at 160,000 x g for 3 h using a SW32.1 rotor (Beckman). Twenty-six fractions of 

1500 μl were collected from each gradient from top (fraction 1) to bottom (fraction 26) and analyzed 

for the presence of α-synuclein aggregates by filter retardation assay, as previously described (11). 

Further characterization of LB fractions was performed by immunofluorescence, α-synuclein 

ELISA quantification and electron microscopy as previously described (11). For stereotactic 

injections, LB-containing fractions from PD patients were mixed together in the same proportion 

(PD#1, fractions 19 and 20; PD#2, fractions 19 and 20; PD#3, fraction 22; PD#4, fractions 17,18 

and 19; PD#5, fractions 20, 21 and 23). NoLB-containing fractions (i.e. fraction 3, at the beginning 

of the 1,2M interface) derived from the same PD patients (which contain soluble or finely granular 

α-synuclein) but lacks large LB-linked α-synuclein aggregates were obtained from the same sucrose 

gradient purification. Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit against human α-

synuclein (Invitrogen, #KHB0061 – following manufacturer’s recommendations), a-syn 

concentration was measured and both LB and noLB fractions were adjusted to ~24 pg α-synuclein 

per microliter. In all cases, samples were bath-sonicated for 5 min prior to in vitro and in vivo 

injections. 

Characterization of noLB and LB fractions 

Electron microscopy. Briefly, carbon-coated nickel grids were covered for 1 min with 

corresponding fractions of interest, then washed 3 times with distilled water. They were then 

washed again in distilled water and stained for 5 min with 2% uranyl acetate, before being air-dried. 

Digital images were obtained with a computer linked directly to a CCD camera (Gatan) on a Hitachi 

H-7650 electron microscope. In all cases, samples were bath-sonicated for 5 min prior to the in 

vitro applications. 

Immunofluorescence analysis of noLB and LB fractions. Indicated fractions from the sucrose 

gradient were spread over slides coated with poly-D lysine and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde 

(PFA) in PBS for 30 min. Fixed slides were stained with 0.05% thioflavin S for 8 min and then 

washed three times with 80% EtOH for 5 min, followed by two washes in PBS for 5 min. Finally, 

all samples were washed 3 times with PBS and blocked with 2% casein and 2% normal goat serum 

for 30 min. For immunofluorescence analyses, samples were incubated with human α-synuclein 

specific antibody (clone syn211, Thermo Scientific, 1:1000) for 30 min, washed three times with 

PBS, incubated with a goat anti-mouse TRITC (Jackson, 1:500), before being cover-slipped for 

microscopic visualization using fluorescence mounting medium. 

Dot-blotting analysis. To evaluate PK-resistant α-synuclein contained in noLB and LB fractions 

derived from PD brains, each fraction was subjected to digestion with 1 µg/ml proteinase K for 0, 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

564 

565 

566 

567 

568 

569 

570 

571 

572 

573 

574 

575 

576 

577 

578 

579 

580 

581 

582 

583 

584 

585 

586 

587 

588 

589 

590 

591 

592 

593 

594 

595 

596 

597 

15, 30, 45, and 60 min. The reaction was stopped by boiling for 5 min before dot-blotting with 

syn211 antibody. To analyze their stability, noLB and LB fractions were treated with increasing 

concentrations of urea (7 and 8M) or sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (0.5, 1 and 2%) for 6 h at room 

temperature. α-Synuclein was visualized as described above. 

Filter retardation assay of noLB and LB fractions were probed with antibodies against, 

phosphorylated α-synuclein (Abcam EP1536Y, 1:1000), ubiquitin (Sigma-Aldrich U5379, 1:1000), 

p62 (Progen GR62-C, 1:1000), hyperphosphorylated tau (AT8, MN1020, ThermoFischer) or Ab 

(DAKO clone 6F/3D, 1:1000). 

Human α -Synuclein aggregation TR-FRET immunoassay. Time-resolved Förster’s resonance 

energy transfer (TR-FRET)-based immunoassays were validated for total and oligomeric α-

synuclein (53). Ten microliters of noLB and LB samples were analyzed for total α-synuclein 

quantification with the TR-FRET immunoassays kit against human α-synuclein aggregation kit 

(Cisbio, #6FASYPEG) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 

Velocity sedimentation and density floatation a-synuclein profiles in noLB and LB fractions. Frozen 

noLB and LB fractions aliquots (100 µL) were thawed and solubilized in solubilization buffer (SB) 

to reach 10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, Complete EDTA-free 

protease inhibitors (Roche), PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Roche), 1 U/µL Benzonase 

(Novagen), 2 mM MgCl2 and 2% (w/v) N-lauroyl-sarcosine (sarkosyl, Sigma) final concentrations, 

by incubating at 37ºC under constant shaking at 600 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf) for 45 minutes. 

For velocity sedimentations, a volume of 400 µL of solubilized noLB / LB fraction was loaded on 

top of a 11 mL continuous 5-20% iodixanol gradient (Optiprep, Sigma) in SB buffer containing 

0.5% w/v final sarkosyl concentration, linearized directly in ultracentrifuge 11 mL tubes (Seton) 

with a Gradient Master (Biocomp). For density floatation gradients, a volume of 400 µL of 

solubilized noLB / LB fraction was mixed to reach 40% iodixanol in SB buffer with 0.5% w/v final 

sarkosyl concentration and loaded within an 11 mL 10-60% discontinuous iodixanol gradient in SB 

buffer with 0.5% w/v final sarkosyl concentration. The gradients were centrifuged at 180,000 g for 

3 hours (velocity) or for 17 hours (density) in a swinging-bucket SW-40 Ti rotor using an Optima 

L-90K ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter). Gradients were then segregated into 16 equal fractions 

from the top using a piston fractionator (Biocomp) and a fraction collector (Gilson). Fractions were 

aliquoted for further analysis of their content by dot-blot. Gradient linearity was verified by 

refractometry. 

For dot blotting, aliquots of the collected native fractions were spotted onto Hybond PVDF 0.2 µm 

membranes (GE Healthcare) using a dot blot vacuum device (Whatman). For total (MJFR1) and 

phosphorylated pS129 (EP1536Y) a-synuclein immunolabelling, a step of fixation in PBS - 0.1% 

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

598 

599 

600 

601 

602 

603 

604 

605 

606 

607 

608 

609 

610 

611 

612 

613 

614 

615 

616 

617 

618 

619 

620 

621 

622 

623 

624 

625 

626 

627 

628 

629 

630 

631 

glutaraldehyde was performed at this point, followed by 3 washes in PBS. Membranes were then 

blocked with 5 % (w/v) skimmed milk powder in PBS - 0.1% (v/v) Tween and probed with anti-

human a-synuclein (MJFR1, rabbit 1:10000, Abcam), anti-phospho pS129 a-synuclein (EP1536Y, 

rabbit 1:5000, Abcam) or anti a-synuclein aggregate specific FILA-1 (MJFR14-6-4-2, rabbit 

1:10000, Abcam) primary antibodies in PBS-T - 4% (w/v) BSA, and secondary goat anti rabbit IgG 

HRP-conjugated antibodies (1:10000, Jackson Laboratories) in PBS-T 1% (w/v) milk. 

Immunoreactivity was visualized by chemiluminescence (GE Healthcare). The amount of the 

respective protein in each fraction was determined by the Image Studio Lite software, after 

acquisition of chemiluminescent signals with a Chemidoc imager (Biorad). Profiles obtained by 

immunoblot were normalized and plotted with SEM using the Prism software. 

FTIR microspectroscopy. 1-2 µL of each suspension was deposited on a CaF2 window and dried at 

room pressure and temperature. The protein aggregates were then measured in transmission at 

50x50 µm² spatial resolution with an infrared microscope (54). Depending on its size it was 

possible to collect one to twenty spectra inside each aggregate. The infrared microscope was a 

Thermo Scientific Continuum equipped with a MCT detector and a 32x 0.65 NA Reflachromat 

objective and matching condenser, coupled to a Thermo Scientific Nicolet 8700 spectrometer with 

a globar source and KBr beamsplitter. The microscope was operated in dual path single aperture 

mode. Spectra were recorded between 650-4000 cm-1 at 2 cm-1 resolution, with Happ-Genzel 

apodization and Mertz phase correction. Spectra were processed in Omnic 9.2 for automatic 

atmospheric correction to remove water vapor contribution. 

Rat Ventral Midbrain Primary Cultures 

Postnatally derived ventral midbrain cultures were prepared essentially as previously described 

(55). Briefly, cultures were prepared in two steps. In the first step, rat astrocyte monolayers were 

generated as follows. The entire cerebral cortex from a single rat pup (postnatal days 1–2) was 

removed, diced, and then mechanically dissociated by gentle trituration. The isolated cells were 

plated at 80,000 cells per well under which a laminin-coated coverslip was affixed. The cells were 

housed at 37°C in an incubator in 5% CO2 and were fed on glial media (89% MEM, 9.9% calf 

serum, 0.33% glucose, 0.5 mM glutamine, and 5 μg/mL insulin). Once confluence had been attained 

(about 1 week in vitro), fluorodeoxyuridine (6.7 mg/mL) and uridine (16.5 mg/mL) were added to 

prevent additional proliferation. In the second stage, which occurred 1 week later, rat pups aged 

between 1 and 2 days were anesthetized and 1-mm3 blocks containing ventral midbrain neurons 

were dissected from 1-mm-thick sagittal sections taken along the midline of the brain. Tissues were 

collected immediately into cold phosphate buffer and were treated enzymatically using papain (20 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

632 

633 

634 

635 

636 

637 

638 

639 

640 

641 

642 

643 

644 

645 

646 

647 

648 

649 

650 

651 

652 

653 

654 

655 

656 

657 

658 

659 

660 

661 

662 

663 

664 

665 

U/mL) with kynurenate (500 μM) at 37°C under continuous oxygenation with gentle agitation for 

2 h. A dissociated cell suspension was achieved by gentle trituration and was then plated onto the 

preestablished glia wells at a density of 0.5–1.7 million neurons per well. Cultures were maintained 

in specially designed neuronal media (47% MEM, 40% DMEM, 10% Hams F-12 nutrient medium, 

1% calf serum, 0.25% albumin, 2 mg/mL glucose, 0.4 mM glutamine, 10 μg/mL catalase, 50 μM 

kynurenic acid, 10 μM CNQX, 25 μg/mL insulin, 100 μg/mL transferrin, 5 μg/mL superoxide 

dismutase, 2.4 μg/mL putrescine, 5.2 ng/mL Na2SeO3, 0.02 μg/mL triiodothyronine, 62.5 ng/mL 

progesterone, and 40 ng/mL cortisol) containing 27 μM fluorodeoxyuridine and 68 μM uridine to 

control glial outgrowth and in 10 ng/mL glial cell derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF). They were 

incubated for a further 7–8 days until the start of experiments. All tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) 

neurons were counted on each plate following the addition of noLB and LB fractions after 1, 2, 5 

and 7 days of treatment. 

Non-Human Primate Behavioral Assessment 

Following a 4-hour minimum habituation phase performed one day before the beginning of the 

observations, baboon behavior was observed outside the feeding and cleaning times, in a random 

order at two-time points (morning and afternoon), over 4 to 9 days (8 sessions per group). On the 

1st observational time point (i.e. 1-month post-surgery), the habituation phase was performed over 

3 days allowing the observer to recognize the animals individually. We used a scan-sampling 

method, appropriate for time budgeting (56), in which behavioral parameters were assessed every 

5 minutes during 2-hour sessions, resulting in 192 scans per individual. Extra observational sessions 

were performed to avoid missing data. A unique trained observer (SC; intra-observer reliability: 

Spearman rank order correlation R=0.987) collected the data live on the 2-time points of the study: 

at 1- and 24-months post-surgery. The observer was standing 1 m away from the outdoor cages. 

We focused on behavioral profiles rather than single items and used two repertoires: one reports 

the interaction with the environment and one describes the position within the environment, 

according to published protocols (57-59). We investigated the percentages of occurrence of each 

item with regard to the total number of scans in order to obtain mean behavioral and postural time 

budgets, body orientation and location profiles. 

Histopathological analysis 

Extent of lesion. To assess the integrity of the nigrostriatal pathway, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) 

immunohistochemistry was performed on SNpc and striatal sections. Briefly, 50µm free-floating 

sections from one representative level of the striatum (anterior, medial and posterior) and serial 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

666 

667 

668 

669 

670 

671 

672 

673 

674 

675 

676 

677 

678 

679 

680 

681 

682 

683 

684 

685 

686 

687 

688 

689 

690 

691 

692 

693 

694 

695 

696 

697 

698 

699 

sections (1/12) corresponding to the whole SNpc were incubated with a mouse monoclonal 

antibody raised against human TH (Millipore, MAB318, 1:5000) for one night at RT and revealed 

by an anti-mouse peroxidase EnVisionTM system (DAKO, K400311) followed by DAB 

visualization. Free-floating SNpc sections were mounted on gelatinized slides, counterstained with 

0.1% cresyl violet solution, dehydrated and coverslipped, while striatal sections were mounted on 

gelatinized slides and coverslipped. The extent of the lesion in the striatum was quantified by optical 

density (OD). Sections were scanned in an Epson expression 10000XL high resolution scanner and 

images were used in ImageJ open source software to compare the grey level in each region of 

interest: i.e. caudate nucleus and putamen. TH-positive SNpc cells were counted by stereology blind 

with regard to the experimental condition using a Leica DM6000B motorized microscope coupled 

with the Mercator software (ExploraNova, France). The substantia nigra was delineated for each 

slide and probes for stereological counting were applied to the map obtained (size of probes was 

100x80μm spaced by 600x400μm). Each TH-positive cell with its nucleus included in the probe 

was counted. The optical fractionator method was finally used to estimate the total number of TH-

positive cells in the SNpc of each monkey hemisphere. In addition, we measured Nissl cell count, 

the volume of SN, and the surface of TH-occupied in SN to fully characterize the pattern of 

dopaminergic cell loss in the SN. 

α-synuclein pathology. Synucleinopathy was assessed with a mouse monoclonal antibody raised 

against human α-synuclein (syn211) and phosphorylated α-synuclein (clone11A5, Elan, 1:5000) 

immunostaining as we previously reported (11, 30). Briefly, selected sections at two rostro-caudal 

levels were incubated in a same well to allow direct comparison of immunostaining intensity. 

Sections were incubated overnight at room temperature with the aforementioned antibodies. The 

following day, revelation was performed with anti-specie peroxidase EnVision system (DAKO) 

followed by 3,3′ -diaminobenzidine (DAB) incubation. Sections were then mounted on gelatinized 

slides, dehydrated, counterstained if necessary and coverslipped until further analysis. Grey level 

quantification or immunostaining-positive surface quantification in forty brain regions (Fig. 2B) 

were performed as previously described (30). 

Inflammation. Inflammatory process in the striatum, in the entorhinal cortex and in the white matter 

of noLB and LB-injected monkeys was measured through GFAP/S-100 (DAKO, Z0334/Abnova, 

PAP11341) and Iba1 (Abcam, ab5076) immunohistochemistry. Striatal sections of all animals were 

incubated together over night with a mix of rabbit antibodies raised against GFAP and S-100 for 

the astroglial staining (respective dilutions 1:2000 and 1:1000) and with a goat anti-Iba1 antibody 

for the microglial staining (dilution 1:1000). These signals were reveled with anti-specie peroxidase 

EnVision system (DAKO) followed by DAB incubation. Sections were mounted on slides, counter-

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

700 

701 

702 

703 

704 

705 

706 

707 

708 

709 

710 

711 

712 

713 

714 

715 

716 

717 

718 

719 

720 

721 

722 

723 

724 

725 

726 

727 

728 

729 

730 

731 

732 

733 

stained in 0.1% cresyl violet solution, dehydrated and cover-slipped. Sections stained by GFAP-S-

100 were numerized at x20 magnification with a NanoZoomer (Hamamatsu, France) and the 

quantification of GFAP-positive astrocytic reaction was estimated by a immunostaining-positive 

surface quantification at regional levels with the Mercator software (ExploraNova, France). 

Sections stained by Iba1 were used for the microglial morphology analysis through fractal 

dimension quantification based on microscopic acquisitions, as previously described(60). All 

analyses were performed blinded to the researcher. 

mRNA extraction and qRT-PCR 

Substantia nigra samples were homogenized in Tri-reagent (Euromedex, France) and RNA was 

isolated using a standard chloroform/isopropanol protocol(61). RNA was processed and analyzed 

following an adaptation of published methods(62). cDNA was synthesized from 2 μg of total RNA 

using RevertAid Premium Reverse Transcriptase (Fermentas) and primed with oligo-dT primers 

(Fermentas) and random primers (Fermentas). QPCR was perfomed using a LightCycler® 480 

Real-Time PCR System (Roche, Meylan, France). QPCR reactions were done in duplicate for each 

sample, using transcript-specific primers, cDNA (4 ng) and LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master 

(Roche) in a final volume of 10 μl. The PCR data were exported and analyzed in an informatics 

tool (Gene Expression Analysis Software Environment) developed at the NeuroCentre Magendie. 

For the determination of the reference gene, the Genorm method was used(63). Relative expression 

analysis was corrected for PCR efficiency and normalized against two reference genes. The 

proteasome subunit, beta type, 6 (Psmb6) and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4a2 (EIF4A2) 

genes were used as reference genes. The relative level of expression was calculated using the 

comparative (2-∆∆CT) method(63). 

Primers sequences: Psmb6 (NM\_002798) forward: CAAGAAGGAGGGCAGGTGTACT; Psmb6 

(NM\_002798) reverse: CCTCCAATGGCAAAGGACTG; EIF4a2 (NM\_001967) forward: 

TGACATGGACCAGAAGGAGAGA; 

EIF4a2 

(NM\_001967) 

reverse: 

TGATCAGAACACGACTTGACCCT; SNCA (CR457058) forward: GGGCAAGAATGAA 

GAAGGAGC; SNCA (CR457058) reverse: GCCTCATTGTCAGGATCCACA. 

Biochemical analysis 

Total protein extraction and quantification. Immunoblot analyses were performed on substantia 

nigra, putamen and caudate nucleus. Five tissue patches were extracted on ice using 100µl of RIPA 

buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 0.1% 

sodium dodecyl sulfate) with a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Complete Mini, Roche 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

734 

735 

736 

737 

738 

739 

740 

741 

742 

743 

744 

745 

746 

747 

748 

749 

750 

751 

752 

753 

754 

755 

756 

757 

758 

759 

760 

761 

762 

763 

764 

765 

766 

767 

Diagnostics). The lysate was placed on ice for 20 min and then centrifuged at 14,000rpm for 15 

min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and the Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) Assay was used to 

determine the total amount of protein in the lysates, and then stored at -80°C. 

Based on total protein concentrations calculated from the BCA assays, aliquots of tissue lysates 

corresponding to known amounts of total protein per lane were prepared for each animal in Laemmli 

buffer (Tris-HCl 25mM pH=6.8, Glycerol 7.5%, SDS 1%, DTT 250mM and Bromophenol Blue 

0.05%) for immunoblotting experiment. 

Biochemical fractionation. This technique was performed as described(64). Tissue patches (n=10) 

were homogenized in 200µl of high-salt (HS) buffer (50 mmol/L of Tris, 750 mmol/L of NaCl, 5 

mmol/L of EDTA, and a cocktail of protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors). Samples were 

sedimented at 100,000 × g for 20 minutes, and supernatants were removed for analysis. Pellets were 

rehomogenized in successive buffers, after which each was sedimented, and supernatant was 

removed: HS containing 1% Triton X-100 (HS/Triton) (Variable names terminated as ultra.s1), 

RIPA (50 mmol/L of Tris, 150 mmol/L of NaCl, 5 mmol/L of EDTA, 1% NP40, 0.5% Na 

deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS) (Variable names terminated as ultra.s12, and SDS/urea (8 mol/L of 

urea, 2% SDS, 10 mmol/L of Tris; pH 7.5) (Variable names terminated as ultra.p2). Sodium dodecyl 

sulfate sample buffer was added, and samples were heated to 100°C for 5 minutes prior to 

immunoblot analysis. 

Western blot analysis. Western blots were run in all conditions from 20µg of protein separated by 

SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose. Incubation of the primary antibodies was performed 

overnight at 4°C with rabbit anti-LC3 (1:1000, Novus Biologicals), rabbit anti- LAMP-2 (1:1000, 

Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse anti-TH (1:1000, Millipore), goat p62 (1:1000, Progen), mouse 

anti human-α-synuclein (1:1000, Thermo Scientific). For detection of ubiquitinated proteins, 

proteins were transferred on polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Millipore) and subjected to 

Western blot analysis using a rabbit anti-Ubiquitin (1:1000, Sigma U5379). Anti-actin (1:5000, 

Sigma) was used to control equal loading. Appropriate secondary antibodies coupled to peroxidase 

were revealed using a Super Signal West Pico Chemiluminescent kit (Immobilon Western, 

Chemiluminescent HRP substrate, Millipore). Chemiluminescence images were acquired using the 

ChemiDoc+XRS system measurement (BioRad). Signals per lane were quantified using ImageJ 

and a ratio of signal on loading per animal was performed and used in statistical analyses. 

Dot-blot analysis of α-synuclein. This technique was performed as we previously described(9, 11). 

After heating at 100 °C for 5 min, 20 μg of protein extract was diluted in buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 

200 mM Glycine, 1% SDS) and filtered through either a nitrocellulose membrane or an acetate 

cellulose membrane (Bio-Rad, 0.2 μm pore size). Membranes were then saturated in 5% dry-

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

768 

769 

770 

771 

772 

773 

774 

775 

776 

777 

778 

779 

780 

781 

782 

783 

784 

785 

786 

787 

788 

789 

790 

791 

792 

793 

794 

795 

796 

797 

798 

799 

800 

801 

skimmed milk in PBS and probed with antibodies against α-synuclein (syn211, 1:1000), both α-

synuclein fibrils and α-synuclein oligomers (Syn-O1, 1:10000(65, 66)) (kindly provided by Prof. 

Omar El-Agnaf). Revelation was done as described in the previous Materials and Methods section. 

Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence (SR-XRF) microscopy elemental mapping of brain 

tissue cryosections 

The synchrotron experiments were carried out at Diamond Light Source, Harwell Science and 

Innovation Campus (Didcot, UK) with a 3 GeV energy of the storage ring and 300 mA currents 

with top-up injection mode. All SR-XRF microscopy investigations reported herein were carried 

out on the microfocus spectroscopy beamline (I18)(67). The micro X-ray fluorescence (μ-XRF) 

elemental mapping were acquired at room temperature with an incident X-ray energy set to 12 keV 

using an Si(111) monochromator and resulting in a X-ray photon flux of 2.1011 ph/s . The substantia 

nigra of each animal were collected from free-floating sections and mounted onto an X-ray 

transparent metal-free 4 μm thickness Ultralene ® foil (SPEXCert Prep, Metuchen, NJ, U.S.A.) 

secured to a customized Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) holder ensuring contamination-free samples 

and reduced X-ray scattering contribution. The samples were affixed to a magnetic plate that 

connects to the sample stage. The 4-element Si drift Vortex ME4 energy dispersive detector 

(Hitachi Hi-Technologies Science America) with Xspress-3 processing electronics, was operated 

in the 90° geometry, as such it minimizes the background signal. The sample-detector distance was 

fixed (75 mm). The sample was held at 45° to the incident X-ray beam and rastered in front of the 

beam whilst the X-ray fluorescence spectra were collected. An area of 500 μm x 500 μm within the 

substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) was mapped for each sample with a step-size that match the 

beam size (5 μm) and a dwell time of 1 s per pixel due to low concentration of the element. A thin 

(100 μm) pellet of the NIST standards reference materials SRM1577c (bovine liver material, NIST, 

Gaithersburg, MD, USA) was measured to calibrate experimental parameters as well as a thin-film 

XRF reference material (AXO Dresden GmbH). This was followed by elemental quantification 

through the open-source software PyMCA(68) in which both the reference material and the sample 

are modelled in terms of main composition, density and thickness. The fluorescence spectrum 

obtained from each pixel was fitted, the elemental concentration (μg/g dry weight or ppm) maps 

were generated and an average elemental concentration of the SNpc regions was obtained. 

Measurement of α-synuclein in monkey biological fluids samples 

Multi-Array 96-well plates (MesoScale Discovery, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) were coated with 30µl 

3µl/ml MJFR1 (abcam, Cambridge, UK) as capture antibody and incubated overnight at 4°C 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

802 

803 

804 

805 

806 

807 

808 

809 

810 

811 

812 

813 

814 

815 

816 

817 

818 

819 

820 

821 

822 

823 

824 

825 

826 

827 

828 

829 

830 

831 

832 

833 

834 

835 

without shaking. The next day plates were washed 3 times with 150µl PBS-T [PBS (AppliChem, 

Darmstadt, Germany) supplemented with 0,05% Tween-20 (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany)] per well. 

Unspecific binding of proteins was prevented by incubation with 150µl 1% BSA (SeraCare Life 

Sciences, Milford, MA, USA)/PBS-T/well for 1 hour and shaking at 700rpm. Calibrators (kindly 

provided by Prof. Omar El-Agnaf) were prepared from single use aliquots of α-synuclein (1µg/ml 

stored at -80°C until use) and ranged from 25000pg/ml to 6,1pg/ml in serial fourfold dilutions. 1% 

BSA/PBS-T served as blank. For the different specimen the following dilutions were applied: 1 in 

10000 for whole blood and 1 in 8 for serum, plasma and CSF. All dilutions were prepared in 1% 

BSA/PBS-T. After washing the plates 25µl calibrator solutions and diluted samples were applied 

to the wells and incubated as indicated above. Plates were washed again and 25µl Sulfo-TAG 

labeled Syn1 antibody (BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany) diluted to 1µg/ml in 1% PBS-T 

were applied to the wells as detection antibody. Sulfo-TAG labeling was done according to the 

manufacturer´s instruction using MSD Sulfo-TAG NHS-Ester (MSD). Incubation was for 1 hour 

at 700rpm. Plates were washed, 150µl 2x Read Buffer (MSD) was applied and the plates were read 

on a MSD SectorImager 2400. Data analysis was performed using WorkBench software (MSD). 

Neurotransmitter analysis 

Brain patches were dissected out on ice-cold plate, weighed and put into 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. 

Samples were homogenized in methanol/water (50:50% v/v), then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 15 

min at 4°C(69). The supernatant was aliquoted and stored at -80°C until amino acid derivatization. 

Glutamate and GABA content in the samples was measured by HPLC coupled with fluorometric 

detection (FP-2020 Plus fluorimeter, Jasco, Tokyo, Japan) after precolumn derivatization with o-

phthaldialdehyde/mercaptoethanol (OPA) reagent(70). Thirty microliters of OPA reagent were 

automatically added to 28 µL sample by a refrigerated autosampler kept at 4C° (Triathlon, Spark 

Holland, Emmen, The Netherlands). Fifty microliters of the mixture were injected onto a 5-C18 

Hypersil ODS column (3 X 100 mm; Thermo-Fisher, USA) perfused at 0.48 mL/min (Jasco PU-

2089 Plus Quaternary Pump; Jasco, Tokyo, Japan) with a mobile phase containing 0.1 M sodium 

acetate, 10% methanol, 2.2% tetrahydrofuran (pH 6.5). Chromatograms were acquired and analysed 

using a ChromNav software (Jasco, Tokyo, Japan). Under these conditions, the limits of detection 

for glutamate and GABA were ~1 nM and ~0.5 nM, and their retention times ~3.5 min and ~18.0 

min, respectively. 

Multiple-Layer Perceptrons 

 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

836 

837 

838 

839 

840 

841 

842 

843 

844 

845 

846 

847 

848 

849 

850 

851 

852 

853 

854 

855 

856 

857 

858 

859 

860 

861 

862 

863 

864 

865 

866 

867 

868 

Each Multiple-layer Perceptron (MLP) had the same architecture rule: 3 neurons as input, 3 neurons 

in the hidden layer and 3 neurons as output. Activation function of neurons was the hyperbolic 

tangent. Each network was trained over 1,000 presentations of a subset of the dataset. We used as 

error measure the mean square of differences between the expected output and the actual output. 

Our implementation comprises two parameters: a learning rate set at 0.05 (regulating the learning 

speed), and a momentum set at 0.05 (introducing purposefully a conservatism bias). Prior to 

learning, inputs were first scaled and centered (z scoring) in order to avoid dimensionality issues 

and then normalized between -0.5 and 0.5. For every combination of 3 variables used as inputs, 50 

instances of MLP were trained with different subsets of the dataset. 80% of available data has 

been used for learning and the remaining 20% for testing the performance of the network (elements 

of each subset were randomly (and uniformly) drawn for each network). The performance from a 

given set of input variables was the mean of the error of the 50 instances of MLP that had data for 

these variables as inputs. Code was written using Python and the Python scientific stack(71-73) 

(Jones, 2001; Walt, 2011; Hunter, 2007). The code is 

fully available here 

(DOI: 

10.5281/zenodo.1240558). Computation has been done using the Avakas cluster of the Mesocentre 

de Calcul Intensif Aquitain (MCIA). Rank-rank hypergeometric overlap (RRHO) test was 

performed as previously described(74) using RRHO package (1.14.0) in R(75) on variable list after 

ranking between experimental groups. Plotting was made using matplotlib in Python environment. 

The association metric was based on lift calculation. Let a and b be the two variables and nx the 

number of combinations including variable x and n the total number of combinations considered in 

the analysis. Lift calculation was then: 

The lift calculation was then corrected for performance to avoid selection of detrimental association 

by being divided by the mean prediction error of the duo. 

Quantification and statistical analysis 

Regarding the data analysis for FTIR microspectroscopy, spectra were analyzed by Principal 

Component Analysis (PCA). PCA is a multivariate statistical analysis technique that captures 

independent sources of variance in the data and represents them in Principal Components 

(eigenvectors) that carry the underlying spectral information and in a Score plot that shows the 

relation between spectra and can be used to cluster the data based on the spectral information. PCA 

were performed in The UnscramblerX 10.3 (Camo Software) using the SVD algorithm with 

leverage correction. Two series of preprocessing were applied prior to PCA and compared. Spectra 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

were either baseline corrected in the amide I region between 1590 and 1700 cm-1 and vector 

normalized, or their second derivatives were computed and vector normalized. 

Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, 

CA). For all experiments, comparisons among means were performed by using One-way analysis 

of variance (ANOVA) followed, if appropriate, by a pairwise comparison between means by Tukey 

post-hoc analysis. All values are expressed as the mean±standard error of the mean. Size effect was 

assessed with Cohen’s d analysis. In all analyses, statistical significance was set at p <0.05. 

869 

870 

871 

872 

873 

874 

875 

876 

877 

878 

 
 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

879 

REFERENCES 

880 
881 
882 
883 
884 
885 
886 
887 
888 
889 
890 
891 
892 
893 
894 
895 
896 
897 
898 
899 
900 
901 
902 
903 
904 
905 
906 
907 
908 
909 
910 
911 
912 
913 
914 
915 
916 
917 
918 
919 
920 
921 
922 
923 
924 
925 
926 
927 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 
8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

H. Braak et al., Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson's disease. 
Neurobiol. Aging 24, 197-211 (2003). 
J. H. Kordower, Y. Chu, R. A. Hauser, T. B. Freeman, C. W. Olanow, Lewy body-like 
pathology in long-term embryonic nigral transplants in Parkinson's disease. Nat Med 14, 
504-506 (2008). 
J. Y. Li et al., Lewy bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with Parkinson's disease suggest 
host-to-graft disease propagation. Nat Med 14, 501-503 (2008). 
I. Mendez et al., Dopamine neurons implanted into people with Parkinson's disease 
survive without pathology for 14 years. Nat Med 14, 507-509 (2008). 
B. Dehay, M. Vila, E. Bezard, P. Brundin, J. H. Kordower, Alpha-synuclein propagation: 
New insights from animal models. Mov Disord 31, 161-168 (2016). 
A. Recasens, A. Ulusoy, P. J. Kahle, D. A. Di Monte, B. Dehay, In vivo models of alpha-
synuclein transmission and propagation. Cell Tissue Res, (2017). 
M. G. Spillantini et al., Alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature 388, 839-840 (1997). 
B. Winner et al., In vivo demonstration that alpha-synuclein oligomers are toxic. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 108, 4194-4199 (2011). 
M. Bourdenx et al., Protein aggregation and neurodegeneration in prototypical 
neurodegenerative diseases: Examples of amyloidopathies, tauopathies and 
synucleinopathies. Prog Neurobiol 155, 171-193 (2017). 
N. Bengoa-Vergniory, R. F. Roberts, R. Wade-Martins, J. Alegre-Abarrategui, Alpha-
synuclein oligomers: a new hope. Acta Neuropathol 134, 819-838 (2017). 
A. Recasens et al., Lewy body extracts from Parkinson disease brains trigger alpha-
synuclein pathology and neurodegeneration in mice and monkeys. Ann Neurol 75, 351-
362 (2014). 
K. C. Luk et al., Pathological alpha-synuclein transmission initiates Parkinson-like 
neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice. Science 338, 949-953 (2012). 
L. A. Volpicelli-Daley et al., Exogenous alpha-synuclein fibrils induce Lewy body 
pathology leading to synaptic dysfunction and neuron death. Neuron 72, 57-71 (2011). 

14. W. Peelaerts et al., alpha-Synuclein strains cause distinct synucleinopathies after local and 

15. 

16. 

17. 

systemic administration. Nature 522, 340-344 (2015). 
E. Bezard et al., Relationship between the appearance of symptoms and the level of 
nigrostriatal degeneration in a progressive 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-
lesioned macaque model of Parkinson's disease. J Neurosci 21, 6853-6861 (2001). 
R. L. Albin, A. B. Young, J. B. Penney, The functional anatomy of basal ganglia 
disorders. Trends Neurosci. 12, 366-375 (1989). 
G. Porras et al., L-dopa-induced dyskinesia: beyond an excessive dopamine tone in the 
striatum. Sci Rep 4, 3730 (2014). 

18. M. Neumann, V. Muller, H. A. Kretzschmar, C. Haass, P. J. Kahle, Regional distribution 

of proteinase K-resistant alpha-synuclein correlates with Lewy body disease stage. J 
Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63, 1225-1235 (2004). 
E. Kovari et al., Lewy body densities in the entorhinal and anterior cingulate cortex 
predict cognitive deficits in Parkinson's disease. Acta Neuropathol 106, 83-88 (2003). 
L. Silveira-Moriyama et al., Regional differences in the severity of Lewy body pathology 
across the olfactory cortex. Neurosci Lett 453, 77-80 (2009). 
Y. C. Wong, D. Krainc, alpha-synuclein toxicity in neurodegeneration: mechanism and 
therapeutic strategies. Nat Med 23, 1-13 (2017). 
B. Dehay et al., Pathogenic lysosomal depletion in Parkinson's disease. J Neurosci 30, 
12535-12544 (2010). 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

928 
929 
930 
931 
932 
933 
934 
935 
936 
937 
938 
939 
940 
941 
942 
943 
944 
945 
946 
947 
948 
949 
950 
951 
952 
953 
954 
955 
956 
957 
958 
959 
960 
961 
962 
963 
964 
965 
966 
967 
968 
969 
970 
971 
972 
973 
974 
975 
976 
977 

23. 

24. 
25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

C. Cook, L. Petrucelli, A critical evaluation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in 
Parkinson's disease. Biochim Biophys Acta 1792, 664-675 (2009). 
S. Kaushik, A. M. Cuervo, Proteostasis and aging. Nat Med 21, 1406-1415 (2015). 
E. C. Hirsch, S. Vyas, S. Hunot, Neuroinflammation in Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism 
Relat Disord 18 Suppl 1, S210-212 (2012). 
D. T. Dexter et al., Alterations in the levels of iron, ferritin and other trace metals in 
Parkinson's disease and other neurodegenerative diseases affecting the basal ganglia. 
Brain 114 ( Pt 4), 1953-1975 (1991). 
K. Du, M. Y. Liu, X. Zhong, M. J. Wei, Decreased circulating Zinc levels in Parkinson's 
disease: a meta-analysis study. Sci Rep 7, 3902 (2017). 
J. Y. Lee et al., Cytosolic labile zinc accumulation in degenerating dopaminergic neurons 
of mouse brain after MPTP treatment. Brain Res 1286, 208-214 (2009). 
C. T. Sheline, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, C. Shi, A. L. Cai, Mitochondrial inhibitor models of 
Huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease induce zinc accumulation and are attenuated 
by inhibition of zinc neurotoxicity in vitro or in vivo. Neurodegener Dis 11, 49-58 (2013). 

33. 

32. 

31. 

30. M. Bourdenx et al., Lack of additive role of ageing in nigrostriatal neurodegeneration 
triggered by alpha-synuclein overexpression. Acta Neuropathol Commun 3, 46 (2015). 
G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, in Knowledge Discovery in Databases, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, W. J. 
Frawley, Eds. (AAAI/MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1991). 
J. P. Bolam, E. K. Pissadaki, Living on the edge with too many mouths to feed: why 
dopamine neurons die. Mov Disord 27, 1478-1483 (2012). 
D. J. Surmeier, J. A. Obeso, G. M. Halliday, Selective neuronal vulnerability in Parkinson 
disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 18, 101-113 (2017). 
I. Carballo-Carbajal et al., Brain tyrosinase overexpression implicates age-dependent 
neuromelanin production in Parkinson's disease pathogenesis. Nat Commun 10, 973 
(2019). 
J. A. Rodriguez et al., Structure of the toxic core of alpha-synuclein from invisible 
crystals. Nature 525, 486-490 (2015). 

34. 

35. 

36. M. D. Tuttle et al., Solid-state NMR structure of a pathogenic fibril of full-length human 

42. 

37. 

38. 

alpha-synuclein. Nat Struct Mol Biol 23, 409-415 (2016). 
L. Bousset et al., Structural and functional characterization of two alpha-synuclein strains. 
Nat Commun 4, 2575 (2013). 
Y. Li et al., Amyloid fibril structure of alpha-synuclein determined by cryo-electron 
microscopy. Cell Res, (2018). 
R. Guerrero-Ferreira et al., Cryo-EM structure of alpha-synuclein fibrils. Elife 7, (2018). 

39. 
40. M. Koch, Artificial Intelligence Is Becoming Natural. Cell 173, 531-533 (2018). 
D. M. Camacho, K. M. Collins, R. K. Powers, J. C. Costello, J. J. Collins, Next-
41. 
Generation Machine Learning for Biological Networks. Cell 173, 1581-1592 (2018). 
T. M. Malta et al., Machine Learning Identifies Stemness Features Associated with 
Oncogenic Dedifferentiation. Cell 173, 338-354 e315 (2018). 
A. Esteva et al., Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural 
networks. Nature 542, 115-118 (2017). 
L. I. Kuncheva, J. J. Rodriguez, On feature selection protocols for very low-sample-size 
data. Pattern Recognition 81, 660-673 (2018). 
D. Castelvecchi, Can we open the black box of AI? Nature 538, 20-23 (2016). 
E. Diguet et al., Deleterious effects of minocycline in animal models of Parkinson's 
disease and Huntington's disease. Eur J Neurosci 19, 3266-3276 (2004). 
E. Diguet, C. E. Gross, F. Tison, E. Bezard, Rise and fall of minocycline in 
neuroprotection: need to promote publication of negative results. Exp Neurol 189, 1-4 
(2004). 

45. 
46. 

44. 

43. 

47. 

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

978 
979 
980 
981 
982 
983 
984 
985 
986 
987 
988 
989 
990 
991 
992 
993 
994 
995 
996 
997 
998 
999 
1000 
1001 
1002 
1003 
1004 
1005 
1006 
1007 
1008 
1009 
1010 
1011 
1012 
1013 
1014 
1015 
1016 
1017 
1018 
1019 
1020 
1021 
1022 
1023 
1024 
1025 
1026 

48. 

R. Aron Badin, M. Vadori, E. Cozzi, P. Hantraye, Translational research for Parkinsons 
disease: The value of pre-clinical primate models. Eur J Pharmacol 759, 118-126 (2015). 

49. M. Ahmed et al., Lentiviral overexpression of GRK6 alleviates L-dopa-induced 

50. 

51. 

52. 

dyskinesia in experimental Parkinson's disease. Sci Transl Med 2, 28ra28 (2010). 
S. Fasano et al., Inhibition of Ras-guanine nucleotide-releasing factor 1 (Ras-GRF1) 
signaling in the striatum reverts motor symptoms associated with L-dopa-induced 
dyskinesia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 21824-21829 (2010). 
G. Porras et al., PSD-95 expression controls l-DOPA dyskinesia through dopamine D1 
receptor trafficking. J Clin Invest 122, 3977-3989 (2012). 
N. M. Urs et al., Targeting beta-arrestin2 in the treatment of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia 
in Parkinson's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112, E2517-2526 (2015). 

53. M. Bidinosti et al., Novel one-step immunoassays to quantify alpha-synuclein: 

54. 

applications for biomarker development and high-throughput screening. J Biol Chem 287, 
33691-33705 (2012). 
G. Zandomeneghi, M. R. Krebs, M. G. McCammon, M. Fandrich, FTIR reveals structural 
differences between native beta-sheet proteins and amyloid fibrils. Protein Sci 13, 3314-
3321 (2004). 

55. W. Dauer et al., Resistance of alpha -synuclein null mice to the parkinsonian neurotoxin 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

MPTP. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99, 14524-14529 (2002). 
J. Altmann, Observational study of behavior: sampling methods. Behaviour 49, 227-267 
(1974). 
S. M. Camus, C. Blois-Heulin, Q. Li, M. Hausberger, E. Bezard, Behavioural profiles in 
captive-bred cynomolgus macaques: towards monkey models of mental disorders? PLoS 
One 8, e62141 (2013). 
S. M. Camus et al., Birth origin differentially affects depressive-like behaviours: are 
captive-born cynomolgus monkeys more vulnerable to depression than their wild-born 
counterparts? PLoS One 8, e67711 (2013). 
S. M. Camus et al., Depressive-like behavioral profiles in captive-bred single- and 
socially-housed rhesus and cynomolgus macaques: a species comparison. Front Behav 
Neurosci 8, 47 (2014). 
F. N. Soria et al., Glucocerebrosidase deficiency in dopaminergic neurons induces 
microglial activation without neurodegeneration. Hum Mol Genet 26, 2603-2615 (2017). 
P. Chomczynski, N. Sacchi, Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidinium 
thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal Biochem 162, 156-159 (1987). 
S. A. Bustin et al., The MIQE guidelines: minimum information for publication of 
quantitative real-time PCR experiments. Clin Chem 55, 611-622 (2009). 
K. J. Livak, T. D. Schmittgen, Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time 
quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods 25, 402-408 (2001). 
E. A. Waxman, B. I. Giasson, Specificity and regulation of casein kinase-mediated 
phosphorylation of alpha-synuclein. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67, 402-416 (2008). 
N. N. Vaikath et al., Generation and characterization of novel conformation-specific 
monoclonal antibodies for alpha-synuclein pathology. Neurobiol Dis 79, 81-99 (2015). 

67. 

66. M. Helwig et al., Brain propagation of transduced alpha-synuclein involves non-fibrillar 
protein species and is enhanced in alpha-synuclein null mice. Brain 139, 856-870 (2016). 
J. F. Mosselmans et al., I18--the microfocus spectroscopy beamline at the Diamond Light 
Source. J Synchrotron Radiat 16, 818-824 (2009). 
V. A. Solé, Papillon, E., M. Cotte, P. Walter, J. Susini, A multiplatform code for the 
analysis of energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectra. Spectrochimica Acta Part B: 
Atomic Spectroscopy 62, 63-68 (2007). 

68. 

 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

69. 

D. M. de Freitas Silva, V. P. Ferraz, A. M. Ribeiro, Improved high-performance liquid 
chromatographic method for GABA and glutamate determination in regions of the rodent 
brain. J Neurosci Methods 177, 289-293 (2009). 

70. M. Marti, C. Trapella, R. Viaro, M. Morari, The nociceptin/orphanin FQ receptor 

antagonist J-113397 and L-DOPA additively attenuate experimental parkinsonism through 
overinhibition of the nigrothalamic pathway. J Neurosci 27, 1297-1307 (2007). 
E. Jones, E. Oliphant, P. Peterson, e. al. (2001). 
S. van der Walt, S. C. Colbert, G. Varoquaux, The NumPy Array: A Structure for 
Efficient Numerical Computation. Computing in Science and Engineering 13, 22-30 
(2011). 
J. D. HUnter, Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Computing in Science and 
Engineering 9, 90-95 (2007). 
S. B. Plaisier, R. Taschereau, J. A. Wong, T. G. Graeber, Rank-rank hypergeometric 
overlap: identification of statistically significant overlap between gene-expression 
signatures. Nucleic Acids Res 38, e169 (2010). 
R. C. Team, R: A language and environment for statistical computing. (R Foundation for 
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2016). 

71. 
72. 

73. 

74. 

75. 

1027 
1028 
1029 
1030 
1031 
1032 
1033 
1034 
1035 
1036 
1037 
1038 
1039 
1040 
1041 
1042 
1043 
1044 

1045 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS : The authors wish to express their gratitude to Pr. Alan R. Crossman 

1046 

(University of Manchester, UK) for his comments for his language supervision. We also thank Dr. 

1047 

Marion Bosc (Cold Spring Harbor, USA) for valuable comments on the manuscript. The authors 

1048 

thank Carmen Lagares Martínez (Head, Veterinary Service, University of Murcia) for 

1049 

administrative assistance; Maria Fermina Ros Romero and Josefa Martínez Rabadán (University of 

1050 

Murcia) for veterinary and husbandry support; Ana Luisa Gil, Lorena Cuenca and Ignacio 

1051 

Mascarell from Clinical and Experimental Neuroscience group (University of Murcia) for their 

1052 

technical help with various parts of the In Vivo part of these complex experiments. We would like 

1053 

to thank Dr. Philippe Hantraye (MIRCen) for providing baboon stereotactic frame. The University 

1054 

of Bordeaux and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique provided infrastructural support. 

1055 

Funding: This work was supported by a grant from the Michael J Fox Foundation (Project Grant 

1056 

No. 2013-8499), Fundacion de Investigacion HM Hospitales (Madrid, Spain), the Fundación 

1057 

Séneca (Project Grant No: FS19540/PI/14), the TARGET PD ANR grant and The Simone and Cino 

1058 

Del Duca Prize from French Academy of Sciences. MB and MLA were supported by a Ministère 

1059 

de l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche fellowship and the France Parkinson Foundation 

1060 

(MB). The help of the Bordeaux Imaging Center, part of the national infrastructure France 

1061 

BioImaging, granted by ANR-10INBS-04-0, is acknowledged. The Human α-Synuclein 

1062 

aggregation TR-FRET immunoassay was done in the Biochemistry and Biophysics Platform of the 

1063 

Bordeaux Neurocampus at the Bordeaux University funded by the LABEX BRAIN (ANR-10-

1064 

LABX-43) with the help of Y. Rufin. Computing time for this study was provided by MCIA 

1065 

(Mesocentre de Calcul Intensif Aquitain), the public research HPC-center in Aquitaine, France. The 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1066 

samples were obtained from the Brain Bank GIE NeuroCEB (BRIF number 0033-00011), funded 

1067 

by the patients' associations France Alzheimer, France Parkinson, ARSEP, and “Connaître les 

1068 

Syndromes Cérébelleux” to which we express our gratitude. The synchrotron Diamond is 

1069 

acknowledged for provision of beam time (exp. SP13009). 

1070 

Author contributions: M.B., M.V., J.O., P.D., B.D. and E.B. conceived and designed the study. 

1071 

M.B., G.P., I.T.D., C.E., N.G.C., M.T.H., B.D. and E.B. performed surgeries. S.C. and C.E. 

1072 

performed behavioral analysis. M.G. set up the actimetry behavioral platform. S.D., A.P. and P.A. 

1073 

performed histologic and immunohistochemical analysis of the data. S.D., A.P. and M.L.A. 

1074 

performed imaging experiments. E.D. performed electron microscopy analysis. F.L., M.L.A. and 

1075 

M.L.T. performed biochemistry experiments. C.P. performed and analyzed primary cultures 

1076 

experiment. S.B. and B.D. performed synchrotron analysis. C.S. performed infrared microscopy. 

1077 

N.K. and B.M. performed biological fluids analysis. S.N. and M.M. performed HPLC analysis. 

1078 

T.L.L. performed mRNA extraction and qPCR analysis. M.B., A.N., S.D., M.L.A., S.C., N.P.R., 

1079 

S.B., C.S., F.L., N.K., B.M., S.N., M.M., C.P., A.R., N.N.V. and O.E.A., M.T.H., P.D., M.V., 

1080 

J.O., B.D. and E.B. analyzed the data. M.B., A.N. and N.P.R. developed the MLP approach. M.B., 

1081 

M.V., J.O., B.D. and E.B. wrote the paper. B.D. and E.B. supervised the project. All authors 

1082 

discussed the results, assisted in the preparation and contributed to the manuscript. All authors 

1083 

approved the final version of the manuscript. 

1084 

Competing interests: E. Bezard is a director and a shareholder of Motac neuroscience Ltd. All the 

1085 

other authors have no conflict of interest to disclose. 

1086 

Data and materials availability: The entire raw data set is made available to the readers (Table 

1087 

S2). Authors chose not to provide representative examples of each procedure for the sake of space 

1088 

and because the entire data set is fully disclosed. Further information and requests for examples 

1089 

should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Corresponding Contacts. Hyperlink to the machine-

1090 

learning 

code 

(10.5281/zenodo.1240558) 

is 

provided 

1091 

(https://zenodo.org/record/1240558#.XC8pqy17Su4). 

1092 

1093 

 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1094 

FIGURES 

1095 

1096 

1097 

Fig. 1. Purification and characterization of Lewy bodies (LB) and noLB inocula from 

1098 

Parkinson disease (PD) brains. (A, left) Immunohistochemistry image of a-synuclein–positive 

1099 

LB (arrows) in nigral postmortem brain samples (PD #1; a-synuclein in brown, neuromelanin in 

1100 

dark-brown) before sucrose gradient purification. The pie chart indicates the relative contribution 

1101 

of the 5 patients to the final pool of LB and noLB inocula (A, middle) Schematic representation of 

1102 

the sucrose gradient fractionation procedure used to purify LB/noLB-containing fractions from 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1103 

freshly frozen postmortem nigral brain tissue of 5 sporadic PD patients. (A, right) Filter retardation 

1104 

assay probed with a human a-synuclein antibody to assess the presence of a-synuclein aggregates 

1105 

in the different fractions obtained by sucrose gradient fractionation from freshly frozen postmortem 

1106 

nigral brain tissue from sporadic PD patients (PD #1). Green rectangle indicates noLB-containing 

1107 

fraction and blue rectangle highlights LB-containing fraction selected to prepare the mixture used 

1108 

for injections. (B) Confocal examination of purified noLB and LB fractions with a-syn 

1109 

immunofluorescence (red) and thioflavin S staining (green). Both LB and noLB present thioflavin 

1110 

S-positive aggregates but much smaller in noLB fractions. Scale bar = 10µm. (C) Ultrastructural 

1111 

examination of noLB and LB fractions by electron microscopy showing massive fibrils in LB 

1112 

fractions while noLB fractions contain, besides soluble a-syn, some punctiform small size 

1113 

aggregates. (D) NoLB and LB fractions derived from PD brains (left panel) were treated with 1 

1114 

µg/ml proteinase K for 0, 15, 30, 45 and 60 min and analyzed by immunoblotting with syn211 

1115 

antibody. The EC50 value was determined as the concentration at which this ratio is decreased by 

1116 

50%. The corresponding EC50 value for LB (>60 min) was approximately fourfold greater than 

1117 

with noLB 

(15.23 min) 

(E) NoLB and LB 

fractions were 

treated 

for 6h with 

1118 

increasing concentrations of either urea or SDS or buffer as control. Syn211 was used to detect the 

1119 

forms of α-synuclein. The LB fractions appear to be more resistant to breakdown compared with 

1120 

noLB fractions in both urea (F(1,8)=6.063, p=0.0392) and SDS treatments (F(1,12)=17.41, p=0.0013). 

1121 

The dotted line show levels of control fractions. Comparison were made using Two-Way ANOVA. 

1122 

(F) TR-FRET immunoassay analysis of noLB and LB fractions. Fluorescence measurements were 

1123 

taken 20h after antibody. Analysis by unpaired Student’s t-test (t(7)=2,623, p=0,0343). \*: P<0.05. 

1124 

Mean ± SEM, n=4-5. (G) Representative pictures of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive substantia 

1125 

nigra pars compacta (SNpc) neurons (brown; Nissl staining in purple) in non-injected, noLB or LB-

1126 

injected mice at 4 months after injections. Scale bars=500µm. (H) Quantification of TH-positive 

1127 

Substantia Nigra pars compacta (SNpc) neurons by stereology in control, LB- and noLB-injected 

1128 

mice. Control mice, n=10, LB-injected mice at 4 months, n=10, No-LB-injected mice at 4 months, 

1129 

n=10. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey test for multiple comparisons. \*: p<0.05 compared 

1130 

with control and noLB-injected side at 4 months. 

1131 

 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1132 

1133 

1134 

Fig. 2. Intrastriatal injection of Lewy bodies (LB) and noLB fractions from Parkinson’s 

1135 

disease patients induces nigrostriatal neurodegeneration in baboon monkeys. (A) Tyrosine 

1136 

hydroxylase (TH) staining at striatum and Substantia Nigra pars compacta (SNpc) levels. A green 

1137 

fire blue LUT (lookup table) was used to enhance contrast and highlight the difference between 

1138 

non-injected, LB-injected and noLB-injected baboon monkeys at striatum level. Scale bars = 5mm 

1139 

(striatum) and 10µm (SNpc). (B) Scatter plot of TH immunostaining in SNpc. F(2,14)=9.439, 

1140 

p=0.0025. Control vs LB-injected: p=0.0029. Control vs noLB- injected: p=0.0248. (C, D) Scatter 

1141 

plots of mean grey values of striatal TH immunoreactivity in the putamen (F(2,14)=7.313, p=0.0067; 

1142 

Control vs LB-injected: p=0.0059) (C) and in the caudate (F(2,14)=16.25, p=0.0002; Control vs LB-

1143 

injected: p=0.0008; Control vs noLB- injected: p=0.0008) (D) in non- injected, LB-injected and 

1144 

noLB-injected baboon monkeys. The horizontal line indicates the average value per group ± SEM 

1145 

(n=7 from control animals; n=6 for LB-injected animals; n=4 for noLB-injected animals). 

1146 

Comparison were made using One-Way ANOVA and Tukey’s correction for multiple comparison. 

1147 

\*p< 0.05 compared with control animals. 

1148 

 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1149 

1150 

1151 

Fig. 3. Multiple-layer perceptron (MLP)-based identification of specific signature. (A) Several 

1152 

endpoints (n=180) were measured using multiple methods (colors). Endpoints can be grouped as 

1153 

clusters: 1. Dopaminergic degeneration, 2. Behavior, 3. a-syn-related pathology. 4. Non-a-syn 

1154 

related pathology. 5. Putative biomarkers. (B) Multiple brain regions (n=40) were investigated from 

1155 

coronal sections at 2 levels: anterior commissure (ac.) -3mm (striatum, entorhinal cortex) and -7mm 

1156 

(SNpc, hippocampus). (C) Detailed methodology. 1. Representative scheme of one MLP predicting 

1157 

3 neurodegeneration-related variables (ND1, ND2, ND3) with 3 experimental variables as input 

1158 

(var1, var2, var3). Out of the 180 variables measured in total, 163 were used as inputs for the MLP. 

1159 

2. One MLP was trained for every unique combination of 3 variables. 3. Combinations were ranked 

1160 

based on their prediction error and top1% were selected for further analysis. 4. Combinations were 

1161 

deconvoluted to extract single variables and count occurrence of individual variables. 5. Variables 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1162 

were sorted based on the number of occurrences in the top1% of the best combination. (D) Raw 

1163 

ranking obtained for LB-injected animals. Color code highlights measurement methods as in A. (E) 

1164 

Raw ranking obtained for noLB-injected animals. Color code highlights measurement methods as 

1165 

in A. 

1166 

1167 

1168 

1169 

Fig. 4. Direct comparison of MLP-derived signatures shows specific pattern between 

1170 

experiment groups. (A) Rank-rank hypergeometric overlap (RRHO) test between variable sorting 

1171 

of LB and noLB-injected animals. Highly enriched variables are in the lower left corner. Diagonal 

1172 

(highlighted by a red dashed line) was extracted to do a bin-to-bin comparison between LB and 

1173 

noLB signatures. (B) Signatures were aligned with RRHO and show low similarity in highly 

1174 

enriched variables (light orange background) and higher similarity for lower rank variables (pale 

1175 

blue background). (C, D) First 20 enriched variables for both LB-injected animals (C) and noLB-

1176 

injected animals (D). Color code is similar to Fig. 2A. Detailed of variable names can be found in 

1177 

Table S1. Bars are mean +/- 99% confidence interval estimated by bootstrap. 

1178 

1179 

 
 
 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1180 

1181 

1182 

Fig. 5. Levels of a-synuclein and phosphorylated a-synuclein in different brain regions. (A) 

1183 

Heat map representing the surface of α-synuclein (a-syn) and S129 phosphorylated α-syn 

1184 

immunostaining intensity in the brain of non-inoculated, LB-inoculated and noLB-inoculated 

1185 

baboon monkeys. The heat maps show all brain regions measured and are organized according in 

1186 

3 main groups: cortical, basal ganglia and sub-cortical areas. From top to bottom: cingulate cortex 

1187 

(ctx.cg), sensorimotor cortex (ctx.sm), retro-insular cortex (ctx.retins), parahippocampal cortex 

1188 

(ctx.phipp), entorhinal cortex (ctx.ent), hippocampus (hipp), caudate nucleus (cd), putamen (put), 

1189 

substantia nigra (sn), ventral tegmental area (vta), red nucleus (rn), subthalamic nucleus (stn), 

1190 

lateral dorsal nucleus (ldn), lateral geniculate nucleus (cgen), claustrum (cltm), fornix (frx), white 

1191 

matter (wm), corpus callosum (corcal). The color bars represent the log2 value of the ratio of each 

1192 

brain regions. (B) Representative pictures of a-syn (a-syn) and phosphorylated a-syn (pSyn S129) 

 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1193 

staining in the entorhinal and parahippocampal cortices. (C, D) Correlation between levels of 

1194 

phosphorylated a-syn in the parahippocampal cortex (C) and the entorhinal cortex (D) with levels 

1195 

of TH staining in the substantia nigra. Dotted line indicates the linear regression. Gray area indicates 

1196 

the 95% confidence interval around of the linear regression. 

1197 

1198 

1199 

1200 

1201 

Fig. 6. Association metric shows independence of strong predictors and beneficial association 

1202 

of weaker predictors. Both network plots were build using number of counts in the top1% as node 

1203 

size and color, and lift (association measure) as edges. To allow better visualization, only 10% of 

 
 
 
 
 
bioRxiv preprint 

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi: 
. 
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under a

this version posted October 31, 2019. 

The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
.

1204 

the strongest edges are shown. (A) Network plot for LB-injected animals showing independence 

1205 

of strong predictors: S129 phosphorylated a-syn (psyn) in the entorhinal (h.psyn.ctx.er) and the 

1206 

para-hippocampal cortex (h.psyn.ctx.phipp), microglia-activation in the putamen (h.iba1.put), a-

1207 

syn in the cingulate cortex (h.syn.ctx.cg) and the supplementary motor area (h.syn.ctx.sma) and 

1208 

GABA levels in the internal part of the globus pallidus (hlpc.gaba.gpi). Upper right box highlights 

1209 

association between actimetry measure (actim) and a scan-sampling measure of body direction 

1210 

toward a closed environment (ss.enf) with a-syn levels in the caudate nucleus (h.syn.cd), the red 

1211 

nucleus (h.syn.rn) and psyn in the sensorimotor cortex (h.psyn.ctx.sm). Lower right box highlights 

1212 

association between pathological a-syn in the putamen (wb.syn.put and db.syn.put) and the SNpc 

1213 

(db.syn.sn) as well as psyn in the ventral tegmental area (h.psyn.vta) and peripheral levels of a-syn 

1214 

in the plasma (bm.plasma). (B) Network plot for noLB-injected animals showing independence of 

1215 

strong predictors: levels of Zn in the SNpc (s.zn.sn), pathological a-syn in the putamen (db.syn.put), 

1216 

a-syn in the supplementary motor area (h.syn.ctx.sma) and aggregated a-syn in the SNpc 

1217 

(wb.synHMW.sn). Upper left box highlights association between autophagosomes (wb.lc3.put) and 

1218 

lysosomes (wb.lamp2.put) levels in the putamen and a-syn in the SNpc (wb.syn.sn). Lower left box 

1219 

highlights association between GABA levels in the internal part of the globus pallidus 

1220 

(hlpc.gaba.gpi), a-syn in the caudate nucleus (wb.syn.cd) and microglia activation in the entorhinal 

1221 

cortex (h.iba1.ctx.er). Lower right box highlights association between soluble (wb.syn.putc) and 

1222 

aggregated (wb.synHMW.putc) levels of a-syn in the putamen. 

1223 

1224 

Supplementary Materials: 

1225 

Table S1. List of variables used in multiple-layer perceptron analyses. 

1226 

Table S2. Raw data that served for the multiple-layer perceptron analyses for all behavioral, 

1227 

histological, biochemical, transcriptional and biophysical approaches (applied to several brain 

1228 

areas, totalizing the quantification of 180 variables for each individual). 

 
 
