An Attractor Model of the Temporal Dynamics of the
Songbird’s Premotor Nucleus
Fjola Hyseni, Nicolas P. Rougier, Arthur Leblois

To cite this version:

Fjola Hyseni, Nicolas P. Rougier, Arthur Leblois. An Attractor Model of the Temporal Dynamics of
the Songbird’s Premotor Nucleus. CNS 2023 - 32nd Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting,
Jun 2023, Leipzig, Germany. . ￿hal-04444204￿

HAL Id: hal-04444204

https://hal.science/hal-04444204

Submitted on 7 Feb 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

An Attractor Model of the Temporal 
Dynamics of the 
Songbird's Premotor Nucleus

FJOLA HYSENI

NICOLAS ROUGIER

ARTHUR LEBLOIS

INSTITUTE OF NEURODEGENERATIVE 
 DISEASES 

BORDEAUX UNIVERSITÉ - CNRS - INRIA 

fjola.hyseni@u-bordeaux.fr

Introduction

1

 Modelling motor timing in sonbirds: Synﬁre Chain vs. Ring Attractor.

Temporal control is crucial for 
coordinated movements during sensorimotor tasks. 

 the generation of 

 What do songbirds te! us about timing? 
In male zebra finches, the premotor nucleus HVC (proper 
name) is responsible for the precise control of song tempo, 
becoming as such an ideal model for action timing.

Song circuitry

Time- locked neuronal activity

How to model motor timing in HVC, in accordance with 
- electrophysiological (3-6 spikes, 6 -10 ms burst) and 
- behavioral (specificity in adaptive learning) evidence? 
Current computational models of HVC rely on synfire chains. 
We propose attractor models as an alternative. 

2 Reproducing HVCRA dynamics

2.9 mV

3.8 mV

90 layers of 15 neurons

0.37 mV

0.41 mV

90 x 150

1. We implement a synfire chain with adaptive leaky integrate 
and fire neurons with synaptic delays and show that the weights 
between layers can be modified only within a narrow range, the 
width of which decreases as we increase the number of neurons 
per layer. 
A.

B.

C.

D.

 2. An alternative hypothesis is that the gradual propagation of an 
activity bump is driven in HVC by attractor dynamics. In particular, a 
linear attractor, also referred to as ring attractor, can drive a drifting 
activity bump with robust and resilient properties thanks to recurrent 
connections. 

2

W(x − x′ ) = W0 + W2

−

(

e

1
σ 2π

x − x′ 

+ β
2σ )

Rate Based Model:

Exponential Integrate & Fire neuron with adaptation (AdEx) and conduction delays:

τ

d
dt

m(x, t) = − m(x, t) + G[Iext(x, t) + Isyn(x, t) − T + τnσnη(x, t)] \*

C

dV
dt

= − gL(V − EL) + gLΔTexp(

V − VT
ΔT

) + Iext − w + Isyn + τnσηi(t) \* \*

Mean Firing Rate across Time, m(x, t)

Mean Firing Rate across Time, m(x, t)

\* 
m(x, t)
: membrane time constant, 
τ
threshold, 

: mean firing rate of neuron at time , 
: external input, 
Iext
 : zero mean Gaussian white noise.

t G
Isyn

x

τnσnη(x, t)

: semi-linear gain function, 
: synaptic input, 

: 

T

Hahnloser et al., Nature 2002

- Using the rate based model, only a a short duration bump profile can be generated, but a small membrane time constant (1 ms) is 
necessary to reproduce the 10 ms burst durations. With the spiking (SNN) model, we acquire results similar to the ones observed in the 
rate model, but are able to generate experimentally-observed neuronal dynamics with bioplausible parameters. 

: membrane potential, C: membrane capacitance, 

V

\*\* 
leak reversal potential, 

w

: adaptation variable, 

VT

gL
: threshold, 

: 
: leak conductance, 
EL
: slope factor.

ΔT

3 Behavioral Adaptation with Reinforcement Learning

4

 Discussion and Conclusion

Relying on a reward covariance rule (Williams, 1992), we show that the 
duration of a syllable can be modified in response to a perturbed reward 
profile, as implemented in a widely used lab conditioning paradigm. 

Synfire Chain (not robust) 
Ring Attractor (robust) 

A.

B.

C.

D.

 Song timing: HVC (HVCRA neurons) 

ΔW

ΔWij = γReijdt

eij =

t

∫

0

dt′ 
τe

e−(t−t′ )/τeηi(t′ )rj(t′ )

AdEx with delays; 3- 6 spikes, 6- 10 ms 
duration (~ HVCRA neurons) 

Specific Adaptive Learning 
(~ behavioral 
experiments) 

White noise

Syllable 1 

Target Syllable 

Syllable 3

Consistent with behavioral data, the change in duration is specific to the 
target syllable. We see no interference with adjacent or non-adjacent 
syllables, both in the case of targeting for duration increase and decrease. 

References

\* 0.0001

SNN

[1] Jin et al., J Comput Neurosci, 2007: Intrinsic bursting enhances the 
robustness of a neural network model of sequence generation by avian brain 
area HVC. 
[2] Hansel & Sompolinsky, 1998: Modeling feature selectivity in local 
cortical circuits. 
[3] Egger et al., Cell, 2020: 
spatiotemporal properties of neural sequences. 
[4] Pehlevan et al., Nat. Comm., 2018: Flexibility in motor timing constrains 
the topology and dynamics of pattern generator circuits. 
[5] Buonomano & Laje, 2010: Population clocks: motor timing with neural 
dynamics. 
[6] Williams, Mach. Learn., 1992: Simple statistical gradient-following 
algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. 

 Local axonal conduction shapes the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
