Distributed, Asynchronous, Numerical and Adaptive Computing From neurons
to behavior

Nicolas P. Rougier INRIA - University of Bordeaux Institute of
Neurodegenerative Diseases, France

GDR BioComp Workshop Saint Paul de Vence, October 2015

• C.Elegans → 302 neurons • Mouse → 71,000,000 neurons • Hamster →
90,000,000 neurons • Rat → 200,000,000 neurons • Marmoset → 634,000,000
neurons • Capucin → 3,690,000,000 neurons • Macaque → 6,376,000,000
neurons • Human → 86,000,000,000 neurons

Brains in numbers

The human brain in numbers […], S. Herculano-Houzel, Frontier in Human
Neuroscience, 2009

The case of Caenorhabditis elegans A few neurons for a complex behavior

Sensory motor behavior Q. Wen, M.D. Po, E. Hulme, S. Chen, X. Liu, S.
Wai Kwok, M. Gershow, A. M. Leifer, V. Butler, C. Fang-Yen, T. Kawano,
W.R. Schafer, G. Whitesides, M. Wyart, D.B. Chklovskii, M. Zhen, A.D.T.
Samueln, Proprioceptive Coupling within Motor Neurons Drives C. elegans
Forward Locomotion. Neuron, 2012.

Plasticity, learning and memory H. Sasakura and I. Mori, Behavioral
plasticity, learning, and memory in C. elegans, Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 2013.

Decision making T.A. Jarrell, Y. Wang, A.E. Bloniarz, C.A. Brittin, M.
Xu, J.N. Thomson, D.G. Albertson, D.H. Hall, S.W. Emmons, The Connectome
of a Decision-Making Neural Network, Science, 2012.

What really matters ?

Architecture ?

• Connectivity • Density • Modularity • Self-organisation

Structure ?

• Neocortex • Basal Ganglia • Amygdala • Frontal cortex

Other ?

• To recognize self/others • To imitate • To use tools • To communicate

Experimental & Theoretical frameworks

Biological framework

Cognitive framework

→ Anatomical facts → Physiological recordings → Experimental data

→ Subsumption architecture → Embodied cognition → Affordances, emotions,
etc.

Computational framework

Philosophical framework

→ Computational paradigm → Plasticity & learning → Evaluation of models

→ Strong AI / Weak AI → Emergence → Theories of mind

Where do we start ?

What is/are the right biological level(s) of description ?

• Molecule ? → neurotransmitters • Organelle ? → axons, dendrites,
synapses • Cell ? → neurons, glial cells • Tissue ? → brain lobes &
structures • Organ ? → brain

Trying to understand perception by studying only neurons is like trying
to understand bird flight by studying only feathers: It just cannot be
done. In order to understand bird flight, we have to understand
aerodynamics; only then do the structure of feathers and the different
shapes of birds’ wings make sense.

D.Marr, Vision, 1982

Spatio-temporal framework

Continuous space

G.Schöner, Dynamical Systems Approaches to Cognition, The Cambridge
Handbook of Computational Psychology, 2008.

… stable patterns of neuronal activation ultimately steer the periphery
into dynamical states, from which behavior emerges, without any need to
ever abstract from the space-time contiguous processes that embody
cognition.

Continuous time JP Spencer, S Perone and JS Johnson, The Dynamic Field
Theory and Embodied Cognitive Dynamics, Toward a Unified Theory of
Development: Connectionism and Dynamic Systems Theory Re-Considered,
2009.

The first challenge is that sensori-motor systems evolve continuously in
real time, but cognition can jump from one state to another, that is,
from one thought to another

Computational Framework Rougier & Fix (2011)

A unit is a set of arbitrary values that can vary along time under the
influence of other units and learning.

• Distributed

→ No supervisor nor executive

• Asynchronous

→ No clock, no scheduler

• Numerical

→ No symbols

• Adaptive

→ No a priori knowledge

We want to make sure that emerging properties are those of the model and
not those of the software running the model.

GroupGroupUnitLinkLayerLinkValueValueValueNeural Fields Wilson & Cowan
(1972), Amari (1977)

Equation Let u(x,t) be the membrane potential at position x and time t,
f a transfer function and w a kernel of lateral interaction. The
temporal evolution of u(x,t) is given by:

τ

·

∂u(x, t) ∂t

= −u(x, t)

-   

(cid:90) +∞

−∞

w(x, y) · f (u(y, t))

dy + I(x)

-   h

time constant

leak term

lateral interactions

resting potential

input

Velocity Unless specified otherwise, we’ll generally consider infinite
speed, i.e. instantaneous transmission of information.

Neural Fields Wilson & Cowan (1972), Amari (1977)

Function The activity of a neural field can be interpreted from a
functional point of view.

Measure Using a specific set of parameters, the activity of a neural
field can also be interpreted as a measure (of the input).

FilterDecisionTrackingMemoryInput = 0.25Input = 0.50Input = 0.75Input =
1.00Part 1 The attentive brain

On ne voit que ce que l’on regarde (We only see what we look at) “L’Œil
et l’Esprit”, Maurice Merleau Ponty, 1961

Everyone knows what attention is. It is the possession by the mind, in
clear and vivid form, of one out of what seem several simultaneously
possible objects or trains of thought. Focalization, concentration, of
consciousness are of its essence. It implies withdrawal from some things
in order to deal effectively with others, and is a condition which has a
real opposite in the confused, dazed, scatterbrained state which in
French is called distraction, and Zerstreutheit in German.

W. James, 1890

How much blind are you ?

Visual exploration (Yarbus, 1967)

Visual Attention

Spotlight metaphor Attention is the capacity to select a relevant region
of the sensory space

• Topological region of the sensory space → spatial attention • Featural
region of the sensory space → feature oriented attention • Object as
such → object oriented attention

A computational approach

Theories of Visual Attention

→ Saliency Maps (Itti & Koch, 2001)

Saliency map is a topographically arranged map that represents visual
saliency of a corresponding visual scene.

• Inhibition Of Return (IOR, Posner, 1980)

IOR operates to decrease the likelihood that a previsously inspected
item in the visual scene will be reinspected.

• Premotor Theory of Attention (Rizzolati, 1987)

Attention may derive from weaker activation of same fronto-parietal
circuits.

Saliency maps (Itti & Koch, 2001)

Image

Saliency map

Saliency maps (Rougier & Vitay, 2006)

• Simple model of visual tracking • Robustness to noise, distractors and

saliency

• Dynamic & reactive behavior

SaliencyInputFocusCompetitionA computational approach

Theories of Visual Attention

• Saliency Maps (Itti & Koch, 2001)

Saliency map is a topographically arranged map that represents visual
saliency of a corresponding visual scene.

→ Inhibition Of Return (IOR, Posner, 1980)

IOR operates to decrease the likelihood that a previsously inspected
item in the visual scene will be reinspected.

• Premotor Theory of Attention (Rizzolati, 1987)

Attention may derive from weaker activation of same fronto-parietal
circuits.

Inhibition of Return (Posner, 1980)

Fixation frameUncuedCuedCueTime0100200300400500Cue Target SOA
(ms)350375400425Reaction time (ms)CuedUncuedInhibition of Return (Vitay
& Rougier, 2005)

• Dynamic Working memory • Biased competition • Sequential behavior

SaliencyMemoryUpdateInputFocusMemorizationBias/GatingCompetitionA
computational approach

Theories of Visual Attention

• Saliency Maps (Itti & Koch, 2001)

Saliency map is a topographically arranged map that represents visual
saliency of a corresponding visual scene.

• Inhibition Of Return (IOR, Posner, 1980)

IOR operates to decrease the likelihood that a previsously inspected
item in the visual scene will be reinspected.

→ Premotor Theory of Attention (Rizzolati, 1987)

Attention may derive from weaker activation of same fronto-parietal
circuits.

Making saccades

Occular saccades lead to drastic changes in visual perception.

Visual anticipation (Fix et al., 2007)

Spatial reference

• Independent of eye movements • Eye-centered

Action in perception

• To anticipate the consequences

of own actions

• To update working memory

accordingly

Bias/GatingSaliencyMemoryAnticipationUpdateSaccadeBiasFocusPredictionInputCompetitionMemorizationA
model of covert and overt attention (Fix et al., 2010)

Search task The camera is placed in front of a visual scene and is able
to pan and tilt. The task can be either to look for a specific
orientation or colour or to look for a conjunction of such features.

Visual SceneCamera positionVisual FieldCamera imageA model of covert
and overt attention (Fix et al., 2011)

MemorizedlocationsWorkingmemoryAnticipationSaliencyFocusSwitchCurrentmemoryPredictionGatingCompetitionUpdatePreparedsaccadeSpatialinhibitionSpatialprocessingOrientationfiltersColorfiltersFeaturemapsSpatialbiasPerceivedfeaturesTargetFeatureprocessingMotorcommandsSwitchMoveFeaturebasedattentionSpatialattentionA
model of covert and overt attention (Fix et al., 2010)

• Feature based attention facilitates processing of relevant features •
Spatial based attention facilitates processing of relevant region •
Working memory prevents to explore already seen location • Model
exhibits both overt and covert attention using same substrate

TimeTowards the organization of visual behavior

From sequential to parallel to sequential

• A bottom-up sequential exploratory behavior has emerged from
distributed &

numeric computation.

• The sequential nature of the behavior is provided through the
interaction with

the external world.

• We ensured no shortcut is made between the simulation and the
behavior.

Part 2 The resilient brain

The Somatosensory System

Donald O. Hebb

• Neurons that fire together wire together

Hubel and Wiesel

• Simple and complex cells (1959) • Ocular dominance columns (1962) •
Critical period, no plasticity after that period (1963-1965)

Merzenich, Kaas and Rasmusson

• Cortical organization of the primary somatosensory cortex (1981) •
Reorganization of the adult primary somatosensory cortex (1983)

The Somatosensory System (Kandel, 2013)

Plasticity in the Somatosensory System (Florence, 2002)

Area 3b Topographic organization of somatosensory cortical area 3b of
owl monkeys after dorsal column transection.

A. Normal somatotopy of the hand

representation

B. Complete dorsal column section at cervical

levels deprives the hand representation of all activating inputs

C. Over the course of weeks, the influence of the

spared inputs expands

Plasticity in the Somatosensory System

• When, where and how organization occurs in the first place ? • How
representations can be both stable and plastic ? • How to cope with
cortical and/or sensory lesions ? • Do current computational models give
a fair account on cortical plasticity ? • Are there other mechanisms or
structures involved ? • What is actually represented through cortical
activity ? • What is the role ot the motor-sensory loop ?

Self-Organizing maps (Kohonen, 1982)

Self-organization…

but…

• Simple 2D topology • Unsupervised learning • Density driven

• Decreasing neighborhood & learning rate • Frozen terminal state •
Winner-takes-all algorithm

Dynamic Self-Organizing maps Rougier & Boniface (2010)

To what extent it is possible to have both stable and dynamic
representations ?

Dynamic The model must dynamically adapts itself to the data.

Stability Model representations must be stable if the input is stable.

Topology Two physically neighborhood cells mut have similar
representations.

Dynamic Self-Organizing maps Rougier & Boniface (2010)

Dynamic Self-Organizing maps Rougier & Boniface (2010)

Dynamic…

but…

• Simple 2D topology • Unsupervised learning • No decreasing parameters

• Winner-takes-all algorithm • Elasticity tuning

Computational model of area 3b Detorakis & Rougier (2013)

Skin model

Non Toric

Toric

0.2 mm5 mm40 mmABCComputational model of area 3b Detorakis & Rougier
(2013)

• Neural field promotes competition • Lateral connections are fixed and

dynamic

• Feed-forwards connections are

plastic

• Learning shapes receptive fields

CorticalLayerNeuronwfInputLayerStimulusReceptorwe(x)wi(x)Computational
model of area 3b Detorakis & Rougier (2013)

Competition Let u(x,t) be the membrane potential at position x and time
t, f a transfer function and w a kernel of lateral interaction. The
temporal evolution of u(x,t) is given by:

τ

·

∂u(x, t) ∂t

= −u(x, t)

-   

(cid:90) +∞

−∞

wl(x, y) · f (u(y, t))

dy + I(x)

-   h

time constant

leak term

lateral interactions

resting potential

input

Learning Learning occurs at every time step.

τ

·

∂wf (x, t) ∂t

=

γ

(s(z, t) − wf (x, t))

(cid:90) +∞

−∞

we(x, y)

f (u(y, t))dy

time constant

learning rate

thalamo-cortical

Using wl(x, y) = we(x, y) − wi(x, y) = Ke exp

excitatory lateral (cid:16) −d2 2σ2 i

− Ki exp

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

(cid:16) −d2 2σ2 e

Computational model of area 3b Initial organization

• Model has been trained on 50000

random samples

• Learning occurs at every time step • Thalamo-cortical connections have

been shaped

• Receptive fields covers uniformly the

skin patch

• Topology is enforced everywhere

Computational model of area 3b Shaping of (classical) receptive fields

Temporal evolution of a receptive field

The shaping of receptive fields occurs through an early expansion stage
followed by a shrinking and a specialization stage.

Cortical lesion Reorganization and expansion of receptive fields

• 25% of neurons are killed • 3 types of lesion

• Reorganization in three phases

• Silence • Expansion • Shrinkage

• Expansion to non-represented

skin areas. • Partial recovery

Sensory deprivation Reorganization ad shrinking of receptive fields

• 25% of receptors are silenced • 3 types of lesion

• Reorganization in three phases

• Silence • Expansion • Shrinkage

• Migration of receptive fields • Full recovery

Structure of Receptive Fields… …in Area 3b of Primary Somatosensory
Cortex in the Alert Monkey (DiCarlo et al, 1998)

StimulusSurface200 micronsshiftRandom dot patternReceptive
FieldSurface2.0 mm5 mmBC40 mmAStructure of Receptive Fields… …in Area
3b of Primary Somatosensory Cortex in the Alert Monkey (DiCarlo et al,
1998)

Structure of Receptive Fields… … on the structure of receptive fields
in area 3b (Detorakis & Rougier, 2014)

51030Excitatoryarea(mm2)51030Inhibitoryarea(mm2n=1024Some questions
received (hypothetical) answers

(cid:88) When, where and how organization occurs in the first place ?
(cid:88) How representations can be both stable and plastic ? (cid:88)
How to cope with cortical and/or sensory lesions ? (cid:88) Do current
computational models give a fair account on cortical plasticity ?
(cid:3) Are there other mechanisms or structures involved ? (cid:3) What
is actually represented through cortical activity ? (cid:3) What is the
role ot the motor-sensory loop ?

Motor and Somatosensory homunculus A missing link

We (in our model) still miss the link between somatosensory and motor
homunculus. You know you’ve been touched but you don’t know where.

Conclusion

From neurons to behavior

• Still many questions to be addressed • Embodiment is a key concepts •
Mathematics are helpful but unsufficient

Mathematical solutions do not characterize functional blocks

FilterDecisionTrackingMemoryIs there something like an objective
behavior ?

Curious (visual tracking) ?

Shy (visual avoidance) ?

We can connect the model to a pan-tilt camera such that it follows a
given stimulus

We can connect the model to a pan-tilt camera such that it looks away
from a given stimulus

The actual behavior of the model depends on the links to its body.
Ultimately, the modeler is the one who decide on the behavior.

SaliencyInputFocusCompetitionCameraSaliencyInputFocusCompetitionCameraWhat
is a model ?

Supposons qu’un être (ou une situation) extérieur(e) X présente un
comportement énigmatique, et que nous nous posions à son sujet une (ou
plusieurs) question(s). Pour répondre à cette question, on va s’efforcer
de modéliser X, c’est-à-dire, on va construire un objet (réel ou
abstrait) M, considéré comme l’image, l’analogue de X : M sera dit le
modèle de X.

R. Thom, Modélisation et scientificité, 1978

To an observer B, an object A* is a model of an object A to the extent
that B can use A* to answer questions that interest him about A.

M. Minsky, Matter, Mind and Models, 1965

Question (Q’)Question (Q)Being (X)AnalogyModel (M)Answer (A’)Answer
(A)The computational model

objective mathematical properties

subjective functional interpretations

The embodied model

behavior through embodiment

quantifiable performances

The cognitive model

observation through interaction

interpretation may depends on our own behavior

A hierarchy of models

The theoretical model provides a direct access to the question

MODELThe embodied model

behavior through embodiment

quantifiable performances

The cognitive model

observation through interaction

interpretation may depends on our own behavior

A hierarchy of models

The theoretical model provides a direct access to the question

The computational model objective mathematical properties subjective
functional interpretations

BrainMODELThe cognitive model

observation through interaction

interpretation may depends on our own behavior

A hierarchy of models

The theoretical model provides a direct access to the question

The computational model objective mathematical properties subjective
functional interpretations

The embodied model behavior through embodiment quantifiable performances

BrainBodyMODELA hierarchy of models

The theoretical model provides a direct access to the question

The computational model objective mathematical properties subjective
functional interpretations

The embodied model behavior through embodiment quantifiable performances

The cognitive model observation through interaction interpretation may
depends on our own behavior

BrainBodySENSORY/MOTORWorld MODELWhere is my mind ? Toward an embodied
and social theory of mind

The Eye of the Beholder Part of the cognition we lend to others may be
rooted in our own cognition.


