[Re] Weighted Voronoi Stippling
Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier. [Re] Weighted Voronoi Stippling. The ReScience journal, 2017, 3 (1), ￿10.5281/zen-
odo.802285￿. ￿hal-01532740￿

HAL Id: hal-01532740

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01532740

Submitted on 3 Jun 2017

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

[Re] Weighted Voronoi Stippling

Nicolas P. Rougier1,2,3

1 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Bordeaux, France. 2 LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, Institut
Polytechnique de Bordeaux, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 5800, Talence,
France. 3 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, Université de Bordeaux, Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France.

Nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr

A reference implementation of

→ Weighted Voronoi Stippling, Adrian Secord. In: Proceedings of the 2Nd

International Symposium on Non-photorealistic Animation and Rendering. NPAR
’02. ACM, 2002, pp. 37– 43.

Introduction

Editor
Thomas Arildsen

Reviewers
Roman Yurchak
Almar Klein

Received Feb, 26, 2017
Accepted May, 9, 2017
Published Jun, 2, 2017

Licence CC-BY

Competing Interests:
The authors have declared that
no competing interests exist.

 Article repository

 Code repository

 Data repository

Adrian Secord introduces in [6] a techniques for generating stipple drawings from
grayscale images using weighted centroidal Voronoi diagrams as in the traditional artis-
tic technique of stippling that places small dots of ink onto paper such that their den-
sity give the impression of tone. The paper is not accompanied by any code and,
even though the webpage of the author points to a code archive, this one is actually
nowhere to be found. We decided to replicate the method because it can be used
for different purpose, especially in computational biology or neuroscience where the
distribution of a cell population can be conveniently described by shades of grey. It is
to be noted that since the publication of this paper, a number of related techniques
have been proposed [1][2][3][4] that may be more efficient but with lower quality. We
thus privileged this implementation that is simple and provides high stippling quality.

Methods

We applied the method proposed in the original paper with some variations. First, we
did not use the GPU to generate the Voronoi diagram because this would introduce a
dependency on OpenGL that would make the script more fragile and more difficult to
run on all systems (Linux/OSX/Windows). However, we provide in the accompanying
code an experimental implementation based on the glumpy library. As in the original
article, this experimental implementation takes advantage of the fact that a set of
cones seen from above using an orthographic projection actually represents a Voronoi
diagram (see [5]). This also gives “for free” a rasterization of each Voronoi region
provided each cone has a distinct color.

Consequently, for all the figures in this article, we used instead the QHull library
(through the Scipy Python package) for computing the Voronoi diagram together
with the Voronoi regions (as a list of segments). We took care of adding extra points
such that each cell is contained within a user-defined bounding box that is set to the
dimension of the density image. Furthermore, each input image is resized (without

ReScience j rescience.github.io

4 - 1

May 2017 j Volume 3 j Issue 1

 ReScienceinterpolation) such that the mean pixel size of a voronoi cell is 500 (e.g. for 1000
stipples, the input image needs to be resized such it contains at least 500x1000 pixels).
For computing the weighted centroid, we applied the definition proposed in the

original paper over the discrete representation of the domain:

∫

Ci =

A x(cid:26)(x)dA
∫
A (cid:26)(x)

Each cell is rasterized (as a set of pixels) and the centroid is computed using the
optimization proposed by the author that allow to avoid to compute the integrals
over the whole set of pixels composing the Voronoi cell. As noted by the author, the
precision of the method is directly related to the size of the Voronoi cell. Consequently,
if the original density image is too small relatively to the number of stipples, there
might be quality issues. We used a fixed number of iterations (n = 50) instead of
using the difference in the standard deviation of the area of the Voronoi regions as in
the original paper since the definition of the rejection criterion was not clear in the
original article and quite arbitrary.

Last, we added a threshold parameter that allows to perform a pre-processing of the
density image. Any pixel with a gray level above the threshold is set to the threshold
value before normalizing the density image. This was necessary for replicating some
of the original images (see results section for further explanation).

Results

We display only the output of our replication to be compared with the ones in the
original articles. The climbing shoe (figure 1), the corn plant (figure 2) and the large
Peperomia plants (figure 3) are very similar to the images displayed in the original
article. It is to be noted that we used different thresholds in order to obtain white areas
similmar to the original images. Without such threshold there would be no reason to
have white areas as for example in the leaves of figure 3.

For the small Peperomia (figure 4), the output of our replication is less similar. If
the hard edges are maintained by the stipple drawing, the differences in shading in our
replication is not obvious compared to the original image. Most probably, the limited
resolution of the input image may be a limiting factor but it is not clear if the author
used these small resolution versions or if he used higher resolutions. We tested this
hypothesis using a bigger image showing leaf with different shading (figure 9) and in
such a case, shading is visible in the output.

We also provide a new set of data that is freely usable for future comparison (CC0

licence).

Conclusion

Most of the results have been replicated even though some slight discrepancies remain
in the final output for one image. It is difficult to identify the precise cause but most
likely, the problem occurs because of the limited resolution of the input picture. We
therefore think most of the results have been replicated.

References

[1]

I Ascencio-Lopez, O Meruvia-Pastor, and Hugo Hidalho-Silva. “Adaptive incremental stip-
pling using the Poisson-disk distribution”. In: Journal of Graphics 15.1 (2010), pp. 29–47.

[2] Michael Balzer. “Capacity-Constrained Voronoi Diagrams in Continuous Spaces”. In: 2009

Sixth International Symposium on Voronoi Diagrams. IEEE, 2009, pp. 79–88.

ReScience j rescience.github.io

4 - 2

May 2017 j Volume 3 j Issue 1

 ReScienceFigure 1: Climbing shoe (1300x1300), 5 000 dots, 50 iterations, fixed point size

ReScience j rescience.github.io

4 - 3

May 2017 j Volume 3 j Issue 1

 ReScienceFigure 2: Corn plant (991x934), 20 000 dots, 50 iterations, fixed point size

ReScience j rescience.github.io

4 - 4

May 2017 j Volume 3 j Issue 1

 ReScienceFigure 3: Large Peperomia plant (700x700), 20 000 dots, 50 iterations, fixed point size

ReScience j rescience.github.io

4 - 5

May 2017 j Volume 3 j Issue 1

 ReScienceFigure 4: Small Peperomia plant (400x400), 20 000 dots, 50 iterations, fixed point size

Figure 5: Figure (512x512), 1000 stipples, 50 iterations, fixed point size

ReScience j rescience.github.io

4 - 6

May 2017 j Volume 3 j Issue 1

 ReScienceFigure 6: Close-up of large Peperomia leaves (1024x1024), 20000 stipples, 50 iterations, fixed
point size

Figure 7: Boots (1280x853), 20 000 dots, 50 iterations, variable point size

Figure 8: Pot plant (1195x1024), 20 000 dots, 50 iterations, variable point size

ReScience j rescience.github.io

4 - 7

May 2017 j Volume 3 j Issue 1

 ReScienceFigure 9: Leafs (1195x1024), 20 000 dots, 50 iterations, variable point size

[3] Michael Balzer, Thomas Schlömer, and Oliver Deussen. Capacity-constrained point distribu-

tions: a variant of Lloyd’s method. Vol. 28. a variant of Lloyd’s method. ACM, July 2009.

[4] R Bridson. “Fast Poisson disk sampling in arbitrary dimensions.” In: SIGGRAPH sketches

(2007).

[5] Kenneth E. Hoff III et al. “Fast Computation of Generalized Voronoi Diagrams Using Graph-
ics Hardware”. In: Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and
Interactive Techniques. SIGGRAPH ’99. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1999,
pp. 277–286.

[6] Adrian Secord. “Weighted Voronoi Stippling”. In: Proceedings of the 2Nd International Sym-
posium on Non-photorealistic Animation and Rendering. NPAR ’02. ACM, 2002, pp. 37–
43.

ReScience j rescience.github.io

4 - 8

May 2017 j Volume 3 j Issue 1

 ReScience