The art of scaling up : a computational account on
action selection in basal ganglia
Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Nicolas P. Rougier, Bapi Raju Surampudi

To cite this version:

Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Nicolas P. Rougier, Bapi Raju Surampudi. The art of scaling up : a compu-
tational account on action selection in basal ganglia. 3rd Annual Conference on Cognitive Science
(ACCS 2016), Oct 2016, Gandhinagar, India. ￿hal-01354041￿

HAL Id: hal-01354041

https://hal.science/hal-01354041

Submitted on 17 Aug 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

The art of scaling up : a computational account
on action selection in basal ganglia

Bhargav Teja Nallapu1,2, Nicolas P. Rougier2,3,4 and Bapi Raju Surampudi1,5

1 International Institute of Information Technology (I.I.I.T), Hyderabad
2 INRIA, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France
3 IMN, CNRS, University of Bordeaux, UMR 5293, IMN, Bordeaux, France
4 University of Bordeaux, CNRS UMR 5800, Labri, IPB, Talence, France
5 School of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Hyderabad, India

Abstract. What makes a model ’large scale’ ? Is it the number of neu-
rons modeled? Or the number of structures modeled in a network? Most
of the higher cognitive processes span across co-ordinated activity in
diﬀerent brain areas. However at the same time, the basic information
transfer takes place at a single neuron level, together with multiple other
neurons. We explore modeling a neural system involving some areas of
cortex, the basal ganglia (BG) and thalamus for the process of deci-
sion making, using a large-scale neural engineering framework, Nengo.
Early results tend to replicate the known neural activity patterns as
found in the previous action selection model [2], besides operating with
a larger neuronal populations. The power of converting algorithms to
eﬃciently weighed neural networks in Nengo [10, 1] is exploited in this
work. Crucial aspects in a computational model, like parameter tuning
and detailed neural implementations, while moving from a simplistic to
large-scale model, are studied.

Keywords: neural dynamics, basal ganglia, large scale, nengo, decision
making

1

Introduction

Action selection is one of the most vital processes for the survival of an organism.
The very importance of the process of action selection (and learning from it) in
the survival of an organism, pushes for a need of understanding the process from
an evolutionary, biological and physiological point of view.

Brain works by running complex dynamics forming complex connections
within itself, speciﬁc to each behavioral repertoire. It is at the level of few (or
many) neurons that the information transfer takes place, which drives all the
processes like perception, memory, decision making, language or any other brain
process. Ideally, it is that level of detail one wants to model any sub-system of
brain or the whole model of brain itself. We start with considering one of our
previous works on a computational study of decision making and its dynamics
using a thalamo-cortical BG network [8] inspired by [2] and replicated in [11].

The emphasis is on modeling these functional networks at a large scale, both
in terms of neuron populations as well as multiple brain structures. To achieve
this, we use a neural engineering framework(NEF) based graphical and scripting
tool called Nengo[10].

2 Methods

2.1 Task

The task is a probabilistic learning task that is described in [9] and used in [2,
11, 8]. Four target shapes are associated with diﬀerent reward probabilities (see
ﬁgure 1). Every time any two of the four possible shapes are presented at two
random positions (out of the four cardinal positions - up, right, down and left).
By the end of trial period, a choice is made and the reward is given according to
the reward probability associated with the chosen shape. In a single independent

Fig. 1. The two armed bandit task as described in [9, 2].

trial, the cognitive decision (shape of the cue) and motor decision (direction of
position) are independent of each other. However, ideally, the motor decision is
expected to be in the direction of the cue shape that is chosen. On subsequent
reward association of the cue decision, one should eventually select the direction
in which the most rewarding cue is present.

2.2 Model

In [4], authors demonstrated an action selection mechanism in the cortico-basal
ganglia loops based on a competition between the positive feedback, direct path-
way through the striatum and the negative feedback, hyper-direct pathway
through the sub-thalamic nucleus. This model allows a bidirectional informa-
tion ﬂow between loops such that during early trials, a direction can be selected
randomly, irrespective of the cue positions. However, after repeated trials, the
model is able to consistently make the motor decision, only after cognitive deci-
sion, towards the position of the more rewarding cue shape.

2.3 The NEF and Nengo

The underlying principles of NEF are: representation, transformation and dy-
namics. The activity of a group of neurons is considered to be best represented

Trial startCue presentationGo signalDecisionRewardTrial stop0.5s - 1.5s1.0s - 1.5s1.0s - 1.5sTimeP = 1.00P = 0.66P = 0.33P = 0.00Reward probabilitiesFig. 2. Architecture of BG model (left) from [2]. A model nengo network (right)

by encoding of some underlying variable, for e.g, any vector generally of smaller
dimensionality. The transformation of information from one neural group to the
other neural group. i.e., the neural group representing x can be connected to
other group of neurons representing a variable y, such that y = f (x). Any de-
sired function can be approximated with improved accuracy by increasing the
number of neurons. The dynamics of NEF allows us to build recurrent neural
networks. These networks can compute the time evolution of a given variable x
of the form dx

dt = f (x, u).

3 Results

The following simulations assume cue shapes are represented by [0, 1, 2, 3] in
the cognitive channel of the cortex and the cardinal directions, where the shapes
could be presented, are also represented by [0, 1, 2, 3] in the motor channel of the
cortex. The cue shapes have a rewarding probability in the order 1>0>2>3. The
synaptic weights that were learned in the previous model were applied. These
weights ensure that the highest rewarding cue is always selected. It is also implicit
in the model dynamics that the position corresponding to the chosen shape only
will be selected. Figure 3 displays the correct cognitive decision (shape) and
corresponding motor decision (position).

Model
Simplistic model [2]
Model implemented
Full-scale rat model [6]

Cortical level Total

24
24000
180K

72
387,200
3 million

Table 1. No. of neurons across models

External currentExternal currentSOURCETARGETEXCITATORYINHIBITORYEXTERNALSTNmotorSTNcognitiveCortexmotorCortexassociativeCortexcognitiveStriatummotorStriatumassociativeStriatumcognitiveGPimotorGPicognitiveThalamusmotorThalamuscognitiveExternal currentFig. 3. For the combinations of cue shape and position, the best rewarding cue shape is
selected (see CTX COG) and the corresponding position (as per stim cog and stim mot
represent shape 0 is shown at position 3 and shape 1 is shown at position 2). It can be
seen that, at a point later than choosing shape, corresponding position is chosen (see
CTX MOT). Inset The decision in the original simplistic model

4 Discussion

For the models claiming to have network-induced dynamics, the choice of the
neuronal dynamics should not make a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. This has been demon-
strated clearly in this work. The model developed is tested under similar condi-
tions of action selection task, switching between direct computations and neural
implementations like Sigmoidal and Integrate & Fire (IF). To start with, we
used simple neurons that directly compute a function. Then the neurons are
changed to detailed implementations, but to a lower scale. However, the switch
between neuron implementations involved minimal tuning of parameters of the
network as well as optimization of few framework parameters, provided there is
computational power to handle the large scale of spiking or IF neurons.

Although the population numbers in this work are comparable to that of ex-
perimental numbers of a rat’s BG and some recent modeling work by Moren et
al. 2015 [6] (see table 1), we are still far away from the scale of that of humans’
(150K in rats where as 2.2 million neurons, only the globus pallidus and sub-
thalamic nucleus combined [3]). As for results, the neural activity corresponding
to synaptic weight-driven decision making and the ideal choice as per high re-
ward, were consistent. We also believe, at a full range simulations on the model,
performance would match that from the previous simplistic model. In future,
such a functional large scale network could become readily usable in other func-
tional processes involving motor reaching or motor learning [5], modeling deﬁcits
in neuro-degenerative disorders such as Parkinsonianism [7] etc.

5 Acknowledgements

The authors would like to acknowledge the following grants which have been a
major support to this research.

– Indo-French CEFIPRA Grant for the project Basal Ganglia at Large (No.

DST-INRIA 2013-02/Basal Ganglia dated 13-09-2014)

– Internships programme at INRIA, 6 month Internship with Team Mnemosyne

at INRIA Bordeaux - Sud-Ouest

– Travel Support by Nengo 3rd annual Summer School on large-scale brain
modeling, University of Waterloo, ON, Canada, 5th June, 2016 - 17th June,
2016

References

1. Bekolay, T., Bergstra, J., Hunsberger, E., DeWolf, T., Stewart, T.C., Rasmussen,
D., Choo, X., Voelker, A.R., Eliasmith, C.: Nengo: a python tool for building
large-scale functional brain models. Frontiers in neuroinformatics 7 (2013)

2. Guthrie, M., Leblois, A., Garenne, A., Boraud, T.: Interaction between cognitive
and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision making: a computational
study. Journal of neurophysiology 109(12) (2013)

3. Halliday, C.D.H.J.M.H.D.I.F.M.K.H.G.P.G.M.: Comparison of the basal ganglia
in rats, marmosets, macaques, baboons, and humans: Volume and neuronal num-
ber for the output, internal relay, and striatal modulating nuclei. The Journal of
Comparative Neurology 445 (2002), http://gen.lib.rus.ec/scimag/index.php?
s=10.1002/cne.10165

4. Leblois, A., Boraud, T., Meissner, W., Bergman, H., Hansel, D.: Competition be-
tween feedback loops underlies normal and pathological dynamics in the basal
ganglia. Journal of Neurosciences 26, 3567–3583 (2006)

5. Magdoom, K., Subramanian, D., Chakravarthy, V.S., Ravindran, B., Amari, S.i.,
Meenakshisundaram, N.: Modeling basal ganglia for understanding parkinsonian
reaching movements. Neural Computation 23(2), 477–516 (2011)

6. Moren, J., Igarashi, J., Yoshimoto, J., Doya, K.: A full rat-scale model of the
basal ganglia and thalamocortical network to reproduce parkinsonian tremor. BMC
Neuroscience 16(1), 1 (2015)

7. Muralidharan, V., Balasubramani, P.P., Chakravarthy, V.S., Lewis, S.J., Moustafa,
A.A.: A computational model of altered gait patterns in parkinsons disease patients
negotiating narrow doorways (2015)

8. Nallapu, B.T., Rougier, N.P.: Dynamics of reward based decision making a compu-
tational study. In: International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (2016)
9. Pasquereau, B., Nadjar, A., Arkadir, D., Bezard, E., Goillandeau, M., Bioulac, B.,
Gross, C.E., Boraud, T.: Shaping of Motor Responses by Incentive Values through
the Basal Ganglia. Journal of Neuroscience 27(5) (2007)

10. Stewart, T.C., Tripp, B., Eliasmith, C.: Python scripting in the nengo simulator

(2009)

11. Topalidou, M., Rougier, N.: [re] interaction between cognitive and motor cortico-
basal ganglia loops during decision making: a computational study. ReScience 1(1)
(2015)

