A Neural Field Model of the Somatosensory Cortex:
Formation, Maintenance and Reorganization of Ordered
Topographic Maps
Georgios Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Georgios Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier. A Neural Field Model of the Somatosensory Cortex: For-
mation, Maintenance and Reorganization of Ordered Topographic Maps. PLoS ONE, 2012, 7 (7),
pp.e40257. ￿hal-00716355￿

HAL Id: hal-00716355

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00716355

Submitted on 10 Jul 2012

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

1

A Neural Field Model of the Somatosensory Cortex: Formation,
Maintenance and Reorganization of Ordered Topographic Maps
Georgios Is. Detorakis1, Nicolas P. Rougier1,∗,
1 INRIA CNRS : UMR 7503 Universit´e Henri Poincar´e - Nancy I Universit´e Nancy II Institut
National Polytechnique de Lorraine, Nancy, France
∗ E-mail: Nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr

Abstract

We investigate the formation and maintenance of ordered topographic maps in the primary somatosen-
sory cortex as well as the reorganization of representations after sensory deprivation or cortical lesion.
We consider both the critical period (postnatal) where representations are shaped and the post-critical
period where representations are maintained and possibly reorganized. We hypothesize that feed-forward
thalamocortical connections are an adequate site of plasticity while cortico-cortical connections are be-
lieved to drive a competitive mechanism that is critical for learning. We model a small skin patch located
on the distal phalangeal surface of a digit as a set of 256 Merkel ending complexes (MEC) that feed a
computational model of the primary somatosensory cortex (area 3b). This model is a two-dimensional
neural ﬁeld where spatially localized solutions (a.k.a. bumps) drive cortical plasticity through a Hebbian-
like learning rule. Simulations explain the initial formation of ordered representations following repetitive
and random stimulations of the skin patch. Skin lesions as well as cortical lesions are also studied and
results conﬁrm the possibility to reorganize representations using the same learning rule and depending
on the type of the lesion. For severe lesions, the model suggests that cortico-cortical connections may
play an important role in complete recovery.

Introduction

Early observations of Leyton and Sherrington [1] (as reported by Lemon in [2]) on the adult anthropoid
apes demonstrated the ability of the motor cortex to recover from extensive cortical lesions. The authors
hypothesized consequently the existence of a neural substrate and/or a mechanism for such extensive
recovery. However, about forty years later, Hubel and Wiesel published a very inﬂuential paper [3]
that promoted the idea of ﬁxed cortical representations following the post-natal developmental period.
This hypothesis has prevailed for a long time until the studies of Merzenich, Kaas et al. [4–6] provided
experimental evidence for somatosensory cortex reorganization following a peripheral nerve injury or am-
putation in the adult monkey. Several neurophysiological studies [7–9] have since conﬁrmed this latter
hypothesis and the cortex is now considered as a dynamic structure that is able to reorganize its represen-
tations during the whole life-time and not only during the critical period. It has been conﬁrmed for the
case of lesion (e.g. strokes) [9, 10], ablation [11, 12] (e.g. tumors surgery), body injury (e.g. accident) or
severe degeneracy’s of thalamocortical and cortico-spinal projections [13,14]. Even environmental factors
may deeply impact cortical representations as it has been demonstrated by Daniel et al. in [15]. However,
the nature of the underlying mechanisms supporting such cortical plasticity is still largely unknown even
if some hypotheses have emerged. In this regard, Feldman and Brecht [16] published an extensive review
of synaptic mechanisms that could be responsible for plasticity in the neocortex at both the synaptic
physiological level (long-term potentiation (LTP), long-term depression (LTD), spike timing dependent
plasticity (STDP), homeostasis, meta-plasticity, GABAergic cells and circuits) and the structural level
(thalamocortical and horizontal cross-columnar axons). Hickmott and Merzenich [17] proposed a similar
study about the properties of local circuit underlying cortical reorganization and identiﬁed two general
classes of mechanisms, one involves a rapid change in the eﬃciency of existing synapses while the other
entails a delayed phase promoting the sprouting of new connections. This latter study is in fact quite con-

2

sistent with the former two-levels analysis. It is to be noted that some of these mechanisms were already
hypothesized to be involved in cortical plasticity. For example, neuronal axon sprouting was also reported
by Florence et al. [18] as a potential candidate, LTP and LTD in [19–22], formation of new synapses [4,23]
and inhibitory and excitatory mechanisms in [24, 25]. Some other candidates have been identiﬁed as well
as the role of the inter hemispheric modulation of somatosensory receptive ﬁelds [26]. Today, no deﬁni-
tive hypothesis has emerged and most probably the answer is a combination of diﬀerent mechanisms at
diﬀerent time scale proportionally to the considered period of development (prenatal/postnatal critical
period/adult period).

One diﬃculty in identifying such a mechanism is that one must give account on both the initial
formation of ordered topographic maps (as it has been observed in primary sensory areas V1, A1 and
S1 for example), the maintenance of such maps during the whole lifetime, the reorganization following
a trauma or an injury and the possible reﬁnement according to experience (e.g. expanding representa-
tions in order to increase accuracy). Since the anatomical organization of the cortex follows a regular
and hierarchical structure [27, 28] whose elementary circuit is the minicolumn (even if they may display
considerable diﬀerences [29]), this latter structure or the macrocolumn (which gathers from 60 to 80
minicolumns [30]) may both represent natural candidates to be investigated further. More precisely, we
know that each cortical layer receives input from four distinct sources, one from extra-cortical areas and
three from intra-cortical areas. First, excitatory neurons of a single layer receive input from other neurons
of the same layer. Second, excitatory neurons of the input layer, L4, receive recurrent feedback input
from L2/3. Thus a positive recurrent loop emerges which seems to account for gain modulation for active
selection and re-combination of the relatively small aﬀerent signals [31]. Third is the background noise
of the cortical circuit that has been proposed to contributes to the modulation of the gain of the circuit
by enhancing the responsiveness of cortical pyramidal neurons, [32, 33]. Last, but not least, excitatory
neurons of L4 receive direct input from the thalamus and if they account approximately for only 15%
of the synapses, Bruno and Sakmann [34] demonstrated in vivo they may nonetheless drive the cortex
without the need for intra-cortical ampliﬁcation and revealed the thalamocortical pathway as a highly
eﬃcient one. In addition, thalamic neurons develop direct mono-synaptic connections onto L4 cortical
excitatory neurons independently of the morphological characteristics of these neurons. Furthermore,
Khazipov et al. [35] described the ontological development of the cortex and the respective contribution
of diﬀerent mechanisms. The maturation of the brain is divided in two major periods, pre- and postnatal.
At the beginning of the prenatal period, genetic information leads to the early formation of the neural
networks followed by a spontaneous electrical activity period that leads to the formation of the columnar
organization [36, 37]. This process continues after birth and stops when the critical period starts. Then,
cortical circuits are driven mainly by experience and synaptic plasticity (e.g. Hebbian learning) takes
place. After the critical period comes to an end the adult brain can still learn and cortical circuits are
able to reorganize themselves and reﬁne their receptive ﬁelds.

At this point, we think that computational neuroscience may play a key role by providing compu-
It has been already the
tational models that can be used to test this or that functional hypothesis.
case with the self-organizing maps as proposed by T. Kohonen [38, 39] in the late eighties that helped
to promote the idea of a competition among units leading to the formation of ordered representations
(although without the possibility of re-organizing them). At the same time, G. Edelman was proposing
to the community his theory of neural group selection [40] and more speciﬁcally, he was proposing a
computational model of plasticity in the organization of the cortical maps [41] where neuronal groups
serve as the basic unit for map organization. However, this model did not emphasize the importance of
the thalamocortical pathway as we explained earlier and we think we might need to reconsider its role in
the formation of and maintenance of the sensory representations.

3

We propose in this article to investigate (computationally) the formation of topographic maps in
the somatosensory cortex as well as the reorganization of representations after sensory deprivation or
cortical lesion. We consider both the critical period (postnatal) where representations are shaped and
the post-critical period where representations are maintained and possibly reorganized. We hypothesize
that feed-forward thalamocortical connections are an adequate site of plasticity to give account for both
the formation and the maintenance of topographic representations and partly for the reorganization
of representations following a sensory or cortical lesion. We therefore focus on the organization and
reorganization of the somatosensory cortex (area 3b) innervated by the mechanoreceptors of the hand. A
model of skin and its associated mechanoreceptors (Merkel ending complexes) is ﬁrst introduced and the
cortical model, based on the dynamic neural ﬁeld theory, is presented together with its dynamics that
allow to drive learning through a Hebbian-like learning rule. Results concerning the initial formation and
maintenance of ordered representation are analyzed as well as results concerning the reorganization of
representations following a cortical or skin lesion. In light of these experiments, we discuss the critical
role of feed-forward thalamocortical connections in the reorganization process as well as the potential
role of lateral connections.

Methods

Skin model

We modeled the Merkel ending complexes (MEC) that are dedicated to sustained touch sensation and
pressure, neglecting other modalities (e.g. temperature, pain). Following data provided by Pare et al.
in [42], we considered a small skin patch located on the distal phalangeal surface of a digit (see ﬁgure
1) that accounts roughly for half of the digit surface in area 3b, rest of the surface being shared among
proximal and middle surface of the same digit [43]. The skin patch is approximately of size 1mm2, using

Figure 1. Skin modeling. A A palmar schematic of the hand1. B Location and relative size of the
modeled skin patch. C Magniﬁcation of skin patch indicating the topology of receptors.

a receptor density of 250/mm2 [44]. It has been modeled as a planar surface [−1, 1] × [−1, 1] (arbitrary
units) and we considered 256 MEC’s that are arranged in a regular grid over the whole surface with a
location jitter of 5%. This results in a quasi-uniform distribution consistent with actual distribution of
MEC as reported in [42] and illustrated in ﬁgure 1C. Each receptor is fully described by its Cartesian
coordinates, namely (Rxi, Ryi), where i ∈ {1, . . . , 256}. We assume that when a stimulus is applied at a

1 Hand drawing by Cy21 available on commons.wikimedia.org under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0

Unported license.

0.2 mm5 mm40 mmABC4

given location (x, y) of the skin patch, the mechanic property of the skin extends the pressure level to
nearby locations [45] such that the response s of any receptor (Rx, Ry) is given by:

(cid:32)

s(Rx, Ry) = exp

−

(cid:114) 1
σ

1
2

((Rx − x)2 + (Ry − y)2)

(1)

(cid:33)

In primates, this somatosensory information ﬂows through several relays, which lie in the spinal cord and
the thalamus, before reaching the cortex. More precisely, dorsal root ganglion (DRG) receives informa-
tion from skin and transmits it to the dorsal column nuclei (DCN) . DCN, in turn, transmits information
from DRG to the ventral posterior lateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus, crossing the midline at the
medulla via the medial lemniscus [46]. These relay stations play a key role in stimuli contrast sharpening
but we decided to ignore them since we considered that the experimental setup provides enough control
over the stimulus and ensures proper sharpness. Hence, the output of all receptors are directly fed to the
cortical model (see ﬁgure 2).

Skin lesions were made by silencing receptors over a speciﬁc area of the skin surface.

Instead of
transmitting proper values, disabled receptors transmit a null value which more likely corresponds to
sensory deprivation. There are three types of lesions (namely type I, II & III) as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.
These three types correspond to three distinct topological situations. The ﬁrst type leads to a skin patch
that is topologically equivalent to the intact one. The second type introduces a separation of the intact
skin patch into two distinct areas and because a stimulus cannot span the two patches at once, these two
skin patches are indeed independent. The third type introduces a hole in the topology of the skin and is
the most challenging to recover from.

Cortical model

A small volume of the primary somatosensory cortex (SI) was modeled using the neural ﬁeld theory [47–50]
which considers a given cortical volume Ω to be a spatial continuum where macro-state variables (such
as the mean ﬁring rate) of a population at position x is given by an equation of type:

1
τ

∂u(x, t)
∂t

= −u(x, t) +

(cid:90)

Ω

w(x, y)f (u(y, t −

|x − y|
v

))dy + i(x, t)

where u(x, t) represents the activity (e.g. the membrane potential) at position x and time t, i(x, t) repre-
sents the synaptic input, w is a weight function measuring the strength of connection between positions
x and y, f is the ﬁring rate function of a single neuron, v is the velocity of an action potential and τ is
the temporal decay.

Given the small size of cortical volume, we neglected velocity eﬀects (v = +∞, see [51] for a study)
and we considered the ﬁeld to be homogeneous and isotropic, leading to the following simpliﬁed equation:

1
τ

∂u(x, t)
∂t

= −u(x, t) + α

(cid:18)(cid:90)

Ω

wl(|x − y|)f (u(y, t))dy + i(x, t)

(2)

(cid:19)

where α is a scaling factor and wl is the weight function of lateral connections. Moreover, we use a simple
rectiﬁcation for the ﬁring function f since it is the simplest function that can provide stability for a such
ﬁeld [52, 53]:

f (x) =

(cid:26) x,
0,

if x ≥ 0
if x < 0

(3)

5

Figure 2. A model of the somatosensory cortex. The skin patch is modeled as a set of 256
mechanic receptors (white discs in the ﬁgure) with a quasi-uniform distribution that feed the cortical
patch. Blue circles represent an example of a stimulus applied on the skin patch and the blue square
represents the stimulation area. The cortical patch is modeled using a neural ﬁeld with a spatial
discretization of size 32×32 elements using global lateral excitation and inhibition. Red circles represent
a (schematic) typical cortical response after learning. The three squares under each patch represent the
diﬀerent cases of lesion that have been studied where the gray part represents the lesioned area.

Skinpatch(1mm×1mm)SkinlesiontypeI,II&III(15,25)Corticalpatch(32×32)CorticallesiontypeI,II&III6

We also considered the input to be a measure of the diﬀerence of a given stimulus s(t) (that correspond
to the n = 256 outputs of the skin receptors) with a set of feed-forward weights wf (x) such that for any
position x, we have:

(cid:18)

i(x, t) =

1 −

|s(t) − wf (x)|
n

(cid:19)

G(x; µc, σc)

(4)

where G(x; µc, σc) is a corrective Gaussian function.
It is corrective in the sense of toric connections
since our model does not enforce any toric topology (it is not implemented on a torus). We therefore
multiplied i(x, t) by a ﬁxed-shape Gaussian function in order to correct any kind of boundary conditions
side-eﬀect. Throughout simulations the variance of the corrective Gaussian function was σc = 2.1, and
the mean, µc = 0. Finally, the lateral connection weight, wl, reﬂects the usual pattern of short-range
excitation (we) and long-range inhibition (wi):

wl(x) = we(x) − wi(x) = Keexp

−

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

x2
2σ2
e

(cid:18)

− Kiexp

−

(cid:19)

x2
2σ2
i

(5)

with Ke, Ki being the amplitudes, σe, σi being the variances of the excitatory and inhibitory Gaussian
functions respectively, such that generally we consider σi (cid:29) σe.

Cortical lesions were made by silencing units over a speciﬁc area of the cortical surface such that dead
unit’s activity was always zero. Like for skin lesions, we considered three types of lesions (namely type I,
II & III) with same topological properties (see ﬁgure 2).

Neural population dynamics

In his seminal work on neural ﬁelds [47], Amari studied the equilibrium solutions, stability and formation
of dynamic patterns providing the conditions for such behaviors in the one-dimensional case. Since then,
a lot of work has been done in the direction of extending the initial theory to other conditions [48], higher
dimensions [49, 54] and diﬀerent behaviors (see the review by Coombes [50]). In the present work, we are
mainly interested in the two-dimensional case since we aim at modeling a cortical sheet. More speciﬁcally,
we are interested in spatially localized solutions (a.k.a. bumps) that may drive the cortical plasticity and
we would like the activity of the ﬁeld to reﬂect to some extent a measure of the input, e.g. a measure
of the distance between the feed-forward weights of the most activated units (i.e. units from the bump)
and the current stimulation. Using a speciﬁc set of parameters P = {Ke, Ki, σe, σi, α} given in table 1,
the ﬁeld can achieve the following property: for any uniform input i(x, t) = v, v ∈ [0, 1], the maximum
activity of the ﬁeld is v. The one-dimensional case is illustrated in the ﬁgure 3. Furthermore the same
property holds true in the two dimensional case using the same set of parameters, P.

Plasticity rule

A learning rule for the classical self-organizing map algorithm [38] has been proposed by Rougier and
Boniface [55], where the original time-dependent (learning rate and neighborhood) learning function has
been replaced by a time-invariant learning rule.
Instead, a dynamic neighborhood function has been
introduced that depends explicitly on the distance of the winner to the presented stimulus. On the one
hand, if the distance of the winning unit is very close to the presented input, the dynamic neighborhood
is rendered very strong but narrow, weakening the learning of other units. On the other hand, when the
winning unit is very far from the presented input, the dynamic neighborhood exhibits a very broad but
weak pattern, promoting weak learning of every unit in the network. This algorithm has been experimen-
tally proved to be able to achieve self-organization in a similar way as of a regular self-organizing map.
Using this idea of a dynamic neighborhood but in the context of neural ﬁelds (no notion of a winning

7

Figure 3. Three solutions of the same one-dimensional neural ﬁeld. Field response (red curve)
for three diﬀerent uniform inputs (blue curve). In each case, the maximum activity of the ﬁeld matches
the input. The spatial discretization of the ﬁeld is 100 units. A Response to input 0.25. B Response to
input 0.50. C Response to input 0.75.

unit), we can use the aforementioned match property to achieve such behavior.

As explained in the introduction, our main hypothesis is that cortical plasticity can be achieved at
the level of thalamocortical connections, corresponding to the feed-forward weights in our model. This
implies that the network does not need to learn the lateral weights. Therefore, we trained the ﬁeld using
a modiﬁed Oja learning rule [56] with the following equation:

∂wf (x, t)
∂t

= γ (s − wf (x))
(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
pre-synaptic term

(cid:124)

×

Le(x)
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
post-synaptic term

(6)

where γ is the learning rate and Le(x) is the total excitation received at the point x which is given by
the two dimensional spatial convolution between the excitatory part of the lateral weight function and
the ﬁeld activity. More precisely, we have:

Le(x) =

(cid:90) T

(cid:90)

0

Ω

f (u(y, t))we(|x − y|)dydt

(7)

where we is the excitatory part of the lateral weight function as it is given by equation (5). The idea
is to explicitly modulate learning according to the sum of excitation received at a point x while the
inhibition only serves during the competition stage. At this stage, it is important to note that we uni-
ﬁed the inhibitory and excitatory neural population into a single population and used positive/negative
weights to reﬂect excitatory/inhibitory action of a neuron onto another. It would be perfectly equivalent
to use a dual population but using a single population makes computation faster. In this context, Le
reﬂects the contribution of excitatory neurons. The learning rule is composed of a pre-synaptic term
and a post-synaptic term. The pre-synaptic term reﬂects the explicit comparison between the stimulus
pattern and the pattern of the feed-forward thalamocortical synapse that enter the neuron. This allows
to gracefully enforce both Hebbian (LTP) and anti-Hebbian (LTD) learning, controlling the growth of
the synapse. The post-synaptic term modulates the pre-synaptic term according to the total sum of
excitation (instead of the post-synaptic activity as it would be in the original Oja rule). As illustrated in
ﬁgure 4, the activation at a speciﬁc site and the amount of excitation received at the same site are highly
correlated but are nonetheless diﬀerent: the extent of excitation goes beyond the extent of activation.
From a more mathematical point of view, we can also note that Le appears to be smooth (C∞) while
u is not (C 0). We have started the formal analysis of that property since we think that this makes a
critical diﬀerence for the self-organization procedure. This signal provides the model with the necessary

0.000.250.500.751.00ABC8

information on neighborhood topology. Furthermore, the support of u (x such that u(x, t) is not null) is
constant and independent of the input (this is a property of the neural ﬁelds) and it may thus not provide
enough information for proper self-organization (we numerically tested a learning rule using u instead of
Le without success). From a biological point of view, this means that a neuron whose membrane potential
is below ﬁring threshold may nonetheless learns if it has received enough excitation.

At early stage of the training, because of the randomness of the feed-forward weights, any stimulus
can cause a weak response of the model at a random place within the ﬁeld (see panel 5A). As the learning
process is ongoing and the feed-forward weights converge according to equation (6), the response of the
model becomes stronger and occupies a speciﬁc spatial location (see panel 5B).

Simulation details

The set of stimuli that is used during training is initially generated by equation (4) over a subset
[−0.75, 0.75]2 of the skin patch [−1.0, 1.0]2. Stimuli locations are set on a regular grid (see ﬁgure 4)
in order to ensure proper coverage of the patch. During training, a stimulus is uniformly drawn from
within this training set. Unless stated otherwise, the same stimuli set is used for all simulations. The
neural ﬁeld has been discretized into 32 × 32 spatial elements and the integration of equation (2) is per-
formed using the forward Euler’s method (time step dt is given in table 1). Feed-forward weights wf are
randomly initialized in the range [0, 1]. During all simulations we used 10000 epochs. In each epoch, the
stimulus is presented to the model and the ﬁeld is integrated over a ﬁxed time window while the learning
rule is applied to the feed-forward weights. Spatial convolution in equations (2) and (7) is calculated
using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) in order to accelerate this operation. Then the activity of the ﬁeld
is reset to zero. This represents the removal of pressure from the skin patch (we could wait for the ﬁeld
to go back to the steady state but it is numerically faster to reset it). The feed-forward weights average
evolution ¯Ei of a neuron i was measured by using the following equation:

¯Ei = |E[wi

fnew

] − E[wi

fold

]|

(8)

where E[·] represents the expected value (i.e. the mean value of the array) and | · | represents the absolute
value. Lesions of type I, II and III (skin or cortex) have been implemented using three masks displayed
in ﬁgure 2. For skin lesion, input was nulliﬁed at lesion sites before being transmitted to the neural ﬁeld
while for cortical lesions, lesioned units were nulliﬁed at each time step.

The receptive ﬁeld of each neuron has been computed from a set of n × n (n = 64 in this work)
regularly distributed stimulus ri over the subset [−0.75, 0.75]2 that have been presented sequentially to
the model. Each individual neuron activity has been recorded and aggregated into a (n, n) matrix of
activities. The size of the receptive ﬁeld has been identiﬁed with the normalized sum of non null values
while the center has been computed as the center of mass C of the receptive ﬁeld given by the following
equation:

C =

n2
(cid:88)

Viri

i=0
n2
(cid:88)

i=0

Vi

(9)

where ri denotes the respective position of stimuli used to compute RF and Vi is the activity at position
ri. Using self-organization information from the intact model, we translated those centers into the
skin reference such that topographical information corresponds, this eases the lecture of the ﬁgure without
changing the results.

9

Figure 4. Locations of training and validation stimuli on the skin patch. A Training is
performed on a set of 16 × 16 stimuli that are uniformly distributed over the [−0.75, 0.75]2 area (skin
patch normalized area is [−1.0, 1.0]2) such that any stimulus is entirely located on the skin patch (see
example stimulus on upper left corner). B Validation (as reported in C panels in result ﬁgures) is
performed on a set of 10 × 10 stimuli that are uniformly distributed over the [−0.75, 0.75]2 area.

Simulations were performed on a HP Z800 Workstation. The source code of all simulations is written in
Python (Numpy, Scipy and Matplotlib) and it is available on-line at http://www.loria.fr/~rougier/
coding/software/DNF-SOM.tgz. During a simulation of 10000 training epochs (sweeps), simulation
program consumes ∼ 190MB of physical memory and requires ∼ 13 minutes of CPU time until reaching
ﬁnal epoch.

Table 1. Model parameters

Ke
3.65

Ki
2.40

σe
0.1

σi
1.0

µc
0.0

σc
2.1

σ
0.15

dt
0.2

α
0.1

τ
1.0

γ
0.05

Ke and Ki are amplitude of the excitatory and inhibitory weight functions. σe and σi are the variances
of excitatory and inhibitory weight functions. The mean and the variance of the corrective Gaussian
function are given by µ and σc, respectively. The variance of stimulus is given by σ and the mean is
variable, although we explain in the text how we compute it. dt is Euler’s method time step. α is a
constant and τ is the time constant of equation (2). γ is the learning rate of learning rule given by
equation (6).

Results

For the sake of simplicity we have split ﬁgures into 6 panels, starting from the evolution of a RF of the
neuron (25, 15) (except the cortical lesion of type II where we used the neuron (15, 25)) from the epoch
number 0 and reaching epoch 10000 through epochs 50, 1500 and 3500. Then we illustrate the preferred
location of the neurons by computing the center of mass according to equation (9) and the size of each
RF of each neuron in order to depict discs on the skin grid which indicate the preferred location and
the size of each RF. In the third panel we illustrate the response of the model to 100 diﬀerent stimuli,

AB10

which cover uniformly the [−0.75, 0.75]2 area (see ﬁgure 4). In the case of skin lesions the stimuli are
larger than the lesion and therefore trigger the neighboring receptors (a single stimulus spans a large
portion of the skin). These stimuli are presented to the model and simultaneously the activity of the
ﬁeld is recorded.
In the fourth panel, we point out the evolution of the feed-forward weights of the
aforementioned neuron and in the two last panels we use two histograms of the size of RFs of the whole
neural ﬁeld. This overall organization allows us to illustrate consistently important alterations that take
place during cortical and skin lesions. The histograms were made using 100 bins. Likewise, we measured
the mean and the standard deviation (SD) of the size of RFs before and after cortical lesions and sensory
deprivations.

Emergence of ordered topographic maps

During the early stage of the learning process, the response of the ﬁeld to a stimulus is not null even though
feed-forward weights have been set to random values. It displays instead a localized but weak activity
as illustrated in panel 5A. This is due to neural ﬁeld properties that guarantee such behavior depending
on the amount of lateral excitation and inhibition. This weak activity bump is highly correlated with

Figure 5. Response of the model and lateral excitation. The response of the model and the
amount of lateral excitation at a speciﬁc site (center of activity). Plots represent the response proﬁle
corresponding to the dashed lines. A Before learning. B After learning.

the presence of lateral excitation at the location of the former. This allows most active units to learn
the presented stimulus proportionally to their lateral excitation (see equation (6)). Once the ﬁeld has
been trained, the response to any stimulus is stronger (see panel 5B) as well as the amount of lateral
excitation. This results in an increased learning rate for a stimulus that is already known to the model
and thus, it does not change drastically the feed-forward weights anymore. This is a key point of the
model since we’ll see in next subsection how this active learning rule may help to recover from lesions.

The evolution over time of the RF of the neuron (number (25, 15)) is illustrated in panel 6A. Initially,
the neuron is mostly silent, but after 1500, 3500 and 10000 presented stimuli, one can see the development
of the RF that is ﬁnally precisely tuned to a speciﬁc set of stimulus location.This evolution occurs in two
phases. In the ﬁrst phase, the RF is extended and covers a large part of the skin, then in a second phase,
as the training process goes on, the RF shrinks and covers only a small part of the skin.

Each neuron now responds preferentially to a speciﬁc skin region. Moreover, panel 6C shows the
response of the model (after training) to 10 × 10 diﬀerent stimuli. It is quite clear that a topographic
map has emerged. Each block in this ﬁgure represents a response of the model to a speciﬁc stimulus (e.g.
the block at the upper left corner represents the response of the model to a stimulus at the upper left
corner of the skin grid) providing a way to verify self-organization and also provides a frame of reference
of the receptive ﬁeld location on the skin patch. Similar results are illustrated in panel 6B where we used
equation (9) in order to compute the location of each receptive ﬁeld on the skin patch. The radius of
each circle has been calculated by using the size of each RF.

A030.00.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.7B030.00.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.711

Figure 6. Intact model A Evolution of the receptive ﬁeld of neuron (25, 15) during learning. The
neuron is initially silent (epoch 0) but learns quickly to answer to a large range of stimuli (epoch 1500)
until ﬁnally settling on a narrower range of stimuli. B Receptive ﬁelds of the whole model. Each blue
circle represents a neuron. The center of the circle indicates the (converted) receptive ﬁeld center and
the radius expresses the (relative) size of the receptive ﬁeld. C Response of the model (after learning) to
a set of 10 × 10 regularly spaced stimuli. Each square represent a response to a speciﬁc stimulus. D
This represents the mean evolution of thalamo-cortical weights of neuron (25, 15) during learning (i.e.
E(25,15)). E & F Histogram of receptive ﬁeld sizes (100 bins) before (E) and after (F) learning. The ﬁnal
distribution is Gaussian-shaped centered around a mean value of 0.02246. Is is to be noted the high
number of very small receptive ﬁeld size that correspond to neurons on the border of the ﬁeld that are
mostly silent during the whole simulation.

EFDBCA0.00.20.40.60.81.0020406080100mean0.02290.000.010.020.030.040.05020406080100mean0.0225050015000.000.020.040.060.080.10250035005000100000.000.020.040.060.080.100.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Epoch = 050150035001000012

Figure 7. Receptive ﬁelds of the intact model. A Of the whole cortical sheet. B Magniﬁcation of
the white box.

In addition, the distribution of RF sizes can undergo alterations during training. Panel 6E shows the
distribution of RF sizes before any learning occurs in the model. As one can expected, there is no RFs at
all since the neurons have not yet learned anything. However, once learning is ﬁnished, one can see in panel
6F the normal-like distribution of the RF sizes. There is a high-value component near zero which indicates
a large number of very small RF sizes that is due to side (border) eﬀects of the neural ﬁeld. Other RF sizes
follow a normal-like distribution with mean 0.02246 (SD= 0.01190). This indicates that there is a better
acquisition of RFs at the center of the ﬁeld than at the periphery. Combining all the aforementioned
results we can conclude that the model has achieved proper self-organization. Subsequently, the emergence
of such an ordered map tends to conﬁrm the initial hypothesis that thalamocortical connections are an
adequate site of plasticity for both the formation and the maintenance of topographic representations.
In this context, lateral connections mainly serve as support for competition at the cortical level for the
emergence of a unique bump of activity that drives learning. Finally, ﬁgure 7 displays the RFs of all the
neurons after 10000 presented stimuli. One can clearly see that ordered representations have emerged
over the whole ﬁeld.

Reorganization after a skin lesion

We ﬁrst studied the case of sensory deprivation resulting, for example, from damaged sensory nerves or
physical damages to the receptors. This has been modeled by silencing a speciﬁc amount of skin receptors
(25% in type I and type II skin lesions and 9% for type III skin lesion) such that only a subpart of pre-
viously sensory information is made available to the cortex. A lesion was made onto three speciﬁc areas
which are referred as lesion type I, type II, and type III (see ﬁgure 2 for precise shape). We only report,
in this section, results from type II lesion since we found qualitatively equivalent results regarding type
I and type III lesions (see appendix A for details). Following a skin lesion, the model has been retrained
over 10000 epochs using the same set of stimuli as before but with missing values from disabled receptors.
Panel 8A shows the temporal evolution of the receptive ﬁeld of unit (25, 15) and panel 8C shows the over-
all reorganization of representations that has occurred according to the response of the model to 10 × 10

AB13

Figure 8. Skin lesion type II (gray area). A Evolution of the receptive ﬁeld of neuron (25, 15)
during retraining after a skin lesion of type II. Immediately following skin lesion (epoch 50), RF tends
to expand. This phenomenon persists until the ﬁnal epoch is reached where a shrinkage takes place. B
Receptive ﬁelds of the whole model. C Response of the model (after retraining) to a set of 10 × 10
regularly spaced stimuli. D This represents the mean evolution of thalamo-cortical weights of neuron
(25, 15) during retraining (i.e. E(25,15)). E & F Histogram of receptive ﬁeld sizes (100 bins) before (E)
and after (F) skin lesion. The initial distribution is Gaussian-shaped centered around a mean value of
0.02246. However, the ﬁnal distribution is a Poisson-like centered around a mean value of 0.2241 with a
long tail indicating that there are a lot of neurons whose RFs have underwent an expansion. At the
same time an almost equivalent amount of neurons has moved toward smaller RF sizes underlying that
a shrinkage of RFs has also taken place.

EFDBCA0.000.010.020.030.040.05020406080100mean0.02250.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.140.16020406080100mean0.0225050015000.000.020.040.060.080.10250035005000100000.000.020.040.060.080.100.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Epoch = 050150035001000014

diﬀerent stimuli. This is most clearly illustrated in panel 8B that displays the preferred location of units
that do not intersect with the skin lesioned area. Comparing the RFs illustrated in this ﬁgure with the
ones on panel 6B, one can conclude that the sizes of RFs which were previously innervated by the lesioned
skin area are now larger. This is because neurons lost their preferred input and therefore the balance of
excitation and inhibition is disrupted. Therefore neurons expand the size of their RFs in order to acquire
new inputs. This resilient behavior can be easily explained because thalamus provides divergent inputs to
the cortex. Neurons that were previously tuned to dead receptors will expand their RFs in order to reach
neighboring receptors. This expansion takes place immediately after the sensory deprivation as shown
in panel 8B and 8A where the RF of neuron (25, 15) underwent an expansion immediately after sensory
deprivation (epoch 50). Panels 8E and 8F shows the histograms before and after sensory deprivation, re-
spectively. The former corresponds to the intact model which we discussed in previous subsection and the
later corresponds to the sensory deprivation case after retraining of the model. There is a small shift of the
main peak of the distribution from the value of 0.02246 towards 0.02227, but with a noticeable spreading
of the RFs (SD = 0.02256) size indicating a new distribution of RF towards both smaller and larger re-
ceptive ﬁelds (while the large component at zero because of border eﬀects remains). This alteration in the
distribution tends to show that even if most RFs have shrunk, a signiﬁcant portion have expanded in size.

Furthermore, from panel 8A describing the temporal evolution of unit (25, 15), we can see that reor-
ganization occurs in two major phases. At the beginning, each neuron innervated by deprived skin area
undergoes an expansion of its RF simultaneously with a spatial shifting in order to capture a new skin
area (ﬁrst phase). This lasts almost during the whole retraining process. Near the end of training process
the aﬀected neuron has shrunk its RF (second phase). Similar to this ﬁnding, Foeller in [21] proposes
a three-phases model of the RFs reorganization. In the ﬁrst phase and due to reduction of inhibitory
connections the RFs expand their size. During the second phase, a further increase of RFs size is taking
place because of homeostatic plasticity of GABA circuits. Finally, in the third phase, a shrinkage of RFs
around their new centers occurring as it is driven by re-established inhibitory connections. We can merge
the two ﬁrst phases into one in our model since we do not involve any kind of neurobiological mechanism
and therefore a such detailed timescale is not necessary.

However, the reﬁnement of the RFs is not so exquisite because, according to our main hypothesis,
lateral connections remain ﬁxed and non-plastic throughout all simulations. This means that neurons are
able to receive proper excitation and inhibition conserving the competitive nature of the reorganization
process. Nevertheless, a better reﬁnement could be possible by using a learning rule also for the lateral
connections. Furthermore and as it has been explained, the precise type of lesion does not impact result
in a signiﬁcant way. Neurons that were preferentially tuned to a disabled skin area tends to have their
receptive ﬁelds shifting away from the site of the lesion to neighboring locations. However, for type II
and type III lesions, there is an additional topological constraint onto those neurons because they can
still be part of an active bump in the ﬁeld (and tune their receptive ﬁeld accordingly). They can be thus
attracted either to the left or to the right part of the lesion site for type II and to any border of the lesion
site for type III. This explains that some neurons do not express any kind of resilience and have their
preferred location still on the lesioned area even after extensive retraining (panels 8B and 13B). This also
explains the increased oscillations in average evolution of feed-forward weights, Ei (panels 8D and 13D).

Reorganization after a cortical lesion

We also addressed the case of reorganization by causing a cortical lesion, i.e. silencing some neurons in
the neural ﬁeld. In living tissue, such damages can be caused by a stroke, a hematoma or by a surgery
either for therapeutic or experimental purposes. Subsequently, we caused three diﬀerent types of cortical
lesions (i.e.
type I, II and III) by applying a mask to the self-organized representational map as we
previously described in methods section. These lesions were of an extent of 25% of the total amount of

15

neurons. We applied a type I lesion close to the border of cortical sheet, a type III, localized ablation
and a type II band-shaped lesion in the mainland of cortical sheet (see ﬁgure 2 for precise lesion shapes).
Thus, after retraining of the network using 10000 stimuli patterns for each of these lesion cases, a new
representational map has emerged as it is depicted in ﬁgure 9 for type I lesion.

Comparing the RFs size before and after cortical lesion, they have been clearly altered. After lesion,
RFs tend to become larger and consequently to respond to larger skin areas. More precisely, RFs size
after lesion is almost twice bigger compared to pre-lesion ones. As it is shown in panel 9A the evolution of
neuron (25, 15) after a cortical lesion of type I has been altered. Immediately following the lesion (epoch
50), RF has expanded itself and cover the skin patch which was previously represented by lesioned
neurons. The temporal evolution of the RF indicates that this neuron has changed its preferred input in
order to promote the recovery. In addition and as it is illustrated in panel 9B, RFs of almost all neurons
have been changed. The radii of the blue discs have been increased in size, especially around the lesion
site. Taking also into account the results coming from the histograms of panels 9E and 9F concerning
the pre-lesion and the post-lesion cases, respectively, one can see the overall distribution of RFs size has
changed in favor of a larger number of large RFs. The mean value of RFs after cortical lesion is equal to
0.02235 and the SD is equal to 0.02179 indicating a signiﬁcant spread of RF sizes.

This is quite consistent with Sober [12] who reported similar results with the noticeable diﬀerence,
that weeks after a lesion, cortex is able to completely recover, having its neurons RFs sharpened. This
is because of re-establishment of inhibitory connections and/or sprouting of neural axons as it has been
proposed by Florence [57]. Consequently, the reﬁnement of RFs arise in two phases. During the ﬁrst
phase, there is an expansion of RFs towards lost territories followed by a shrinkage of the second phase.
In our computational experiments there is no such shrinkage during the second phase because of the
ﬁxed set of lateral connections as it is depicted in ﬁgures 9A, 10A and 11A. This leads us to ascertain
that the lateral connections are crucial to the development of stable representational maps. Neurons
are not able to precisely reﬁne their RFs since there is no balance mechanism between excitation and
inhibition within cortical circuits. Sur [58] has shown that intralaminar excitatory connections are the
major factor for expansion of RFs. In consequence, RFs in ﬁgures 9A and 9B have successfully expanded
themselves leading to larger skin area representation but have failed at shrinking themselves because of
the non-plastic lateral connections. Furthermore, it is remarkable to see that neurons have migrated to
cover the whole skin surface again (panels 9A, 9B) and non-functional representations (just after lesion)
have been recaptured by neighboring units. The model is able to respond again to stimuli applied on
areas innervating neurons within the lesioned cortical area (panel 9C). This indicates that other neurons
took over and recovered from lesion by migrating their representations towards the lost ones, making the
cortical patch functional but degraded.

Recovery from cortical lesions of type II and III is displayed in ﬁgures 10 and 11 and show the
degraded response of the model with only a partial recovery of lost territories. Furthermore, panels 10A,
10B and 11A, 11B clearly show that most RFs have been shifted and expanded spatially without any
kind of reﬁnement except for a small number which have underwent a shrinkage as it is pointed out by
panels 10F and 11F. This behavior can be explained quite simply in terms of topology. The ﬁrst type
of cortical lesion is topologically equivalent to the intact one while type II lesion introduces a separation
of the cortical patch into two distinct patches and type III introduces a hole in the topology. In both
cases, neurons from either sides of the lesion cannot cooperate because their inﬂuence is mostly inhibitory
(due to their respective distance from each other). This means that the active population resulting from
the competition cannot exist on any borders of the lesion. This brings severe constraints to the self-
organization process that can only be partially overcome without relearning a new topology through the
modiﬁcations of lateral connections.

16

Figure 9. Cortical lesion type I (red area) A Evolution of the receptive ﬁeld of neuron (25, 15)
during retraining after a cortical lesion of type I. Immediately following the lesion (epoch 50), RF tends
to expand. This phenomenon persists until the ﬁnal epoch is reached. B Receptive ﬁelds of the whole
model. C Response of the model (after retraining) to a set of 10 × 10 regularly spaced stimuli. The
activity of the model is now bound to the unlesioned area. D This represents the mean evolution of
thalamo-cortical weights of neuron (25, 15) during retraining (i.e. E(25,15)). E & F Histogram of
receptive ﬁeld sizes (100 bins) before (E) and after (F) skin lesion. The initial distribution is
Gaussian-shaped centered around a mean value of 0.02246. However, the ﬁnal distribution is a
uniform-like centered around a mean value of 0.02245 (0.02235). This uniform-like distribution indicates
the existence of neurons whose RFs have underwent an expansion, but not a shrinkage.

EFDBCA0.000.010.020.030.040.05020406080100mean0.02250.000.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.080.09020406080100mean0.0224050015000.000.020.040.060.080.10250035005000100000.000.020.040.060.080.100.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Epoch = 050150035001000017

Figure 10. Cortical Lesion type II (red area) A Evolution of the receptive ﬁeld of neuron (15, 25)
during retraining after a cortical lesion of type II. This particular neuron has not expanded its RF but
it has replaced its preferred location as it is depicted at the ﬁnal proﬁle (epoch 10000). B Receptive
ﬁelds of the whole model. The cortical lesion is appeared at the preferred locations since the previously
corresponding neurons are now aﬀected by the lesion. The RFs around the lesion have been increased in
size comparing with the corresponding pre-lesion ﬁgure 6B. C Response of the model (after retraining)
to a set of 10 × 10 regularly spaced stimuli.The activity of the model is now bound to the unlesioned
area. D This represents the mean evolution of thalamo-cortical weights of neuron (15, 25) during
retraining (i.e. E(15,25)). E & F Histogram of receptive ﬁeld sizes (100 bins) before (E) and after (F)
skin lesion. The initial distribution is Gaussian-shaped centered around a mean value of 0.02246.
However, the ﬁnal distribution is a Uniform-like centered around a mean value of 0.02233. This
uniform-like distribution indicates the existence of neurons whose RFs have underwent an expansion,
but not a shrinkage as in cortical lesion type I case. In this case we illustrate results regarding neuron
(15, 25) because neuron (25, 15) lies in the lesion.

EFDBCA0.000.010.020.030.040.05020406080100mean0.02250.000.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.080.09020406080100mean0.0223050015000.000.020.040.060.080.10250035005000100000.000.020.040.060.080.100.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Epoch = 050150035001000018

Figure 11. Cortical lesion type III (red area) A Evolution of the receptive ﬁeld of neuron
(25, 15) during retraining after a cortical lesion of type III. This particular neuron has expanded its RF
immediately after lesion and moreover it has has replaced his preferred location as it is depicted at the
ﬁnal proﬁle (epoch 10000). B Receptive ﬁelds of the whole model. The cortical lesion is appeared at the
preferred locations since the previously corresponding neurons are now aﬀected by the lesion. The RFs
around the lesion have been increased in size comparing with the corresponding pre-lesion ﬁgure 6B. C
Response of the model (after retraining) to a set of 10 × 10 regularly spaced stimuli. D This represents
the mean evolution of thalamo-cortical weights of neuron (25, 15) during retraining (i.e. E(25,15)). E & F
Histogram of receptive ﬁeld sizes (100 bins) before (E) and after (F) skin lesion. The initial distribution
is Gaussian-shaped centered around a mean value of 0.02246. However, the ﬁnal distribution is a
Uniform-like centered around a mean value of 0.02227. This uniform-like distribution indicates the
existence of neurons whose RFs have underwent an expansion, but not a shrinkage as in cortical lesion
type I case.

EFDBCA0.000.010.020.030.040.05020406080100mean0.02250.000.020.040.060.080.10020406080100mean0.0223050015000.000.020.040.060.080.10250035005000100000.000.020.040.060.080.100.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Epoch = 050150035001000019

Discussion

We have introduced a computational model of primary somatosensory cortex that is able to develop
topographic maps, maintain and reorganize them in the face of lesions. We used neural ﬁelds as a math-
ematical and computational framework and focused on area 3b innervated by hand mechanoreceptors.
The combination of such neural ﬁeld with a simple Hebbian/anti-Hebbian like learning rule advocates
for an unsupervised, distributed, robust and biologically plausible model of a (simpliﬁed) somatosensory
cortical model where thalamocortical connections are the main sites of plasticity. The major ﬁnding of
our model is that a topographic map can emerge as a consequence of the interaction between thalamus
and cortical excitatory aﬀerent connections. These feed-forward connections are capable of causing the
reorganization of a topographic map even in the presence of a cortical lesion or a sensory deprivation.
Bruno in [34] has shown that excitatory thalamocortical connections can synchronize themselves in or-
der to drive cortical neurons without making use of any kind of cortical ampliﬁcation mechanism. This
enhanced our hypothesis, which states that the main eﬀort of the emergence and reorganization of a topo-
graphic map can be promoted by thalamocortical connections. This also holds for all three investigated
cases. First, the formation and emergence (one) of a topographic map. Second, sensory deprivation (two
- congenital and contracted). And in the end, cortical lesions (four - congenital, boundary contracted,
centered contracted, localized ablation).

Those results are quite consistent with the existing literature on the computational modeling of the
somatosensory cortex even though we think we brought new insights on the inner mechanisms. One the
earliest model of the SI has been proposed by Pearson et al. [41]. They designed a computational model
of the somatosensory cortex based on a dual population of neurons (excitatory / inhibitory) which receive
topographic projections from two receptor sheets corresponding to the glabrous and dorsal surfaces of
the hand. Following the repetitive tapping of the sensory surface, the model is able to shape itself into
several segregated neuronal groups that are dedicated to a subpart of the whole sensory space. Authors
used both intrinsic and extrinsic connections modiﬁcations although they underlined that they do not
know if this is really the case in vivo. Joublin et al. [59] introduced a combination of neurophysiological
recordings from rats with computational simulations. The model is described using a set of Wilson-Cowan
equations and the architecture is made of three layers (receptors grid, subcortical grid and cortex). Au-
thors tried to keep the model close to real data in order to be able to compare their simulations with
neurophysiological data. However, the model relies on a pre-cortical level whose role is to topographically
order representations in order to simplify the simulation. Furthermore, they didn’t treat lesion cases and
focused instead on the learning rule pointing out that diﬀerent learning rules underlying diﬀerent forms
of plasticity. Xing and Gerstein [60–62] used a spiking neural network within a three layer model (i.e.
receptors, thalamus, cortex) paying attention to the lateral connections. Authors showed that inhibitory
connections are crucial for limiting the number of activated cortical neurons, while the balance between
excitation and inhibition is crucial to the stability of the network. This is quite consistent with our
own results since the competitive process occurring within the model relies on a precise balance between
inhibition and excitation. In the cortical lesion cases, we’ve also shown that the model cannot achieve
full recovery without modiﬁcations of the lateral connections. This is again quite consistent with the
important role of lateral connections given by previous models even though those models did not address
speciﬁcally the case of cortical and cutaneous lesions. We can conclude with them that lateral connections
play an important role and the reﬁnement of RFs following a lesion may be due to the modiﬁcation of
lateral connections. However, we maintain that thalamocortical aﬀerent connections are the main sites
of plasticity for both primary self-organization and later reorganization.

We would like now to point out a few more interesting results. Foeller and Feldman [21] as well
as Florence et al. [63], proposed that RFs are capable of reﬁnement and shrinkage during a long-term
reorganization process of a topographic map in the presence of a sensory deprivation. Our model, due

20

to non-labile lateral connections, is not able to achieve such precise reﬁnement during the reorganization
of the topographic map. This leads us to claim that lateral connections is a major moderator of RFs,
especially during the reorganization process of the cortical sheet. Nevertheless, we have been able to show
the expansion of RFs, which means that RFs are able, during the reorganization process, to represent a
larger skin area rather than they did before lesion. But this is only one part of the whole picture as it is
only one out of two (or maybe three) reorganization phases. This second phase is missing in our model.
During that reorganization phase a shrinkage of RFs takes place due to adaptation of lateral connections,
the sprouting of new intra-cortical connections and the left-over unaﬀected thalamocortical connections.
In addition lateral connections must be an important and valuable mechanism of the balance between
excitatory and inhibitory neural populations, which, in turn, steers to the reorganization of robust topo-
graphic maps. Nevertheless, our model indicates that even without relearning lateral connections, cortical
sheet is able to fully or partially recover from a cortical lesion depending on its type. Lesion of type I
does not modify the topology of the ﬁeld and allow for a robust and full recovery while lesions of type
II and III are more problematic and leads to partial recovery only. From a neurophysiological point of
view such cortical lesions means that the skin patch which provides aﬀerent input to the dead neurons
loses its cortical representation. Hence, neurons that are unaﬀected by lesion receive input from the non-
representative skin patch and a reorganization of the SI topographic map takes place. The consequence
in our model is an expansion of the RF for the unaﬀected neurons (see ﬁgure 11B). However, one would
Instead, it
expect unaﬀected neurons to cover almost the whole skin patch or at least a larger part.
is obvious that there is a covering of the skin patch but still there is a part of the skin which remains
uncovered. This means that there is input from some areas of the skin but the responsible neurons are
now dead. After the reorganization process a new topographic map has formed and hence the unaﬀected
neurons have taken over the previously non-representative territories of the skin patch. This phenomenon
is illustrated in ﬁgure 11C, where the model is able to respond to diﬀerent stimuli. Therefore, the tuning
of RFs of unaﬀected neurons is not optimal. We believe that this is closely related to the lack of relearning
of lateral connections. More precisely, the cortical lesion disrupts the balance in the lateral connections
and we do not allow the model to ﬁx it by relearning these connections. This seems to be a critical
process because lateral connections are not able to convey proper competition anymore.

At this point, we can point out two major characteristics of a cortical lesion (or ablation) that could be
responsible for a proper reorganization and recovery of a cortical sheet. First, is the location of the lesion,
Where the lesion is located? and second the extent of the lesion, What is the amount of the dead neurons?
Both, location and extent are intertwined, in a fashion that the former pervades the later and vice versa.
Therefore, we can discriminate two diﬀerent cases. First, if the lesion is located around the border of two
or more cortical representations and provided the extent of the lesion is not too large, then recovery is
easily achievable. This is because of the large amount of left over neurons and aﬀerent connections. How-
ever, if the extent of the lesion is large enough, then the representations cannot recover completely and
they may even not recover at all. Second, if the lesion is located within a single representation, recovery
is only a matter of the extent of the lesion itself. That is because, if a signiﬁcant amount of neurons are
aﬀected by the lesion, there is no enough neurons to deploy their RFs and revive previously lost territory.
Yet, in a localized lesion case we noticed that in the vicinity of the lesioned area, there are some neurons
which do not respond so intensively as the others and those neurons drive other neurons leading them to
reorganize themselves. As it is depicted in ﬁgure 14 of Appendix B those neurons have a speciﬁc shape
which is inherited by the neighboring neurons that expand their RFs omnidirectionaly. Similar ﬁndings
have been pointed out by Sober in [12], where a disinhibitory halo around cortical ablation has been
found. Proximal neurons to this halo are able to drive the reorganization of the neighborhood neurons
via their intact lateral connections. Proximal neurons have been loosed their inhibitory connections due
to ablation and therefore they have omnidirectionally expanded RFs. Furthermore distant neurons have
narrower RFs. Likewise, the case of cortical lesion type III of our model presents a similar behavior as it

21

has been illustrated by ﬁgures 6B and 11B considering the pre- and postlesion state, respectively. RFs
in the later ﬁgure are larger than those in the former ﬁgure. In the later ﬁgure neurons around lesion
have larger RFs in size. This is in accordance with the results of Sober and the so-called disinhibitory
halo. Although, in our model we keep the lateral connections ﬁxed and therefore in the case of a cortical
lesion there is no way to recover them. Hence, a disturbance of lateral connections triggers a disturbance
of excitation/inhibition balance and thus neurons close to lesion receive mostly excitatory connections
rather than inhibitory, which in turn causes the expansion of the RFs around lesion and the shrinkage of
the distant ones. To test further this hypothesis, we can observe that lateral cortico-cortical connections
are a major component of the competitive mechanism that allows to have a unique and compact active
population. The shape of this population is critical for learning since it enforces the topology within the
model. More precisely, we can predict that any modiﬁcation on the size of the active population would
have a direct impact on the receptive ﬁelds. For example, if we were to decrease the inhibition level at
the cortical level while blocking learning, the size of the active population would grow and this would
result in larger receptive ﬁelds. This would mean a loss in sensory representation: the two point discrim-
ination distance would be increased. On the opposite, if we were to increase the inhibition level, the size
of the active population would become smaller and lead to smaller receptive ﬁelds (and higher precision).

The model has been kept deliberately simple and it comes as no surprise that a number of known mech-
anisms have not been taken into account like for example homeostatic mechanisms and/or metaplasticity
which have been proposed by Turrigiano and Nelson [64] as moderator factors of lateral connections. The
former conserves and regulates the average activity of brain circuits by scaling neural synapses and the
later prevents them from saturation eﬀects [65]. As future work we left the examination of homeostatic
mechanisms and metaplasticity as we believe that this model is oﬀered for further investigation through
its ability to adjust its activity depending on the intensity of stimulus. This, in turn, can prevent networks
from saturation eﬀects in the same way metaplasticity may aﬀect neural circuits of the brain. Another
aspect we did not treat is the phenomenon of spontaneous activity. It is rational to discuss about this
because it seems to play a key role in the development of a topographic map within cortex. For instance,
Katz and Shatz [66] and Khazipov and Luhmann [35] have found a mechanism which could explain the
early formation of L4 in barrel cortex and V1 in rats, respectively. In both cases the topographic map
has been formed almost completely before birth. Adding to that ﬁndings from Khazipov et al. [36], we
can conclude that a fetus in utero may take advantage of spontaneous movements in order to establish an
early formed topographic map in L4 within a sensorimotor loop. We also neglected top-down mechanisms
such as attentional modulatory signals. Knight et al.
in [67] have proposed that the prefrontal cortex
acts as a modulator of balance of excitation and inhibition of the brain. This provides a straight-forward
attentional mechanism since this regulation of balance can aﬀect the receptive ﬁelds of neurons. Fur-
thermore, according to the results of Schaefer [68], prefrontal cortex seems to provide to somatosensory
cortical areas a gating mechanism which is able to reﬁne receptive ﬁelds through inhibition/excitation
regulation regarding to attention. We neglected such mechanisms in this work because we believe that
they are out of the scope due to the lack of a closed loop (e.g. sensorimotor loop). We thus left as
future work the investigation of the role of top-down mechanisms in topographic maps formation and
reorganization.

In conclusion, even though this model does not consider all neurophysiological aspects which might
play an important role in the overall organization process, we believe that it can help to investigate
further the emergence of somatotopic maps during the early months of life. The model is simple enough
from a mathematical/computational point of view to allow for further reﬁnement that could potentially
give account on more experimental data.

22

A Skin lesion : supplementary ﬁgures

B Cortical lesion : supplementary ﬁgures

Acknowledgments

References

1. Leyton S, Sherrington C (1917) Observations on the excitable cortex of the chimpanzee, orang-utan

and gorilla. Quaterly Journal of Experimntal Physiology 11: 135–222.

2. Lemon R (2008) An enduring map of the motor cortex. Experimental Physiology 93: 798–802.

3. Hubel D, Wiesel T (1959) Receptive ﬁelds of single neurones in the cat’s striate cortex. The Journal

of physiology 148: 574–591.

4. Merzenich M, Kaas J (1982) Reorganization of mammalian somatosensory cortex following periph-

eral nerve injury. Trends in Neurosciences 5: 434–436.

5. Kaas J, Merzenich M, Killackey H (1983) The reorganization of somatosensory cortex following
peripheral nerve damage in adult and developing mammals. Annual Review of Neuroscience 6:
325–356.

6. Kaas J (1991) Plasticity of sensory and motor maps in adult mammals. Annual review of neuro-

science 14: 137–167.

7. Steven M, Blakemore C (2004) Cortical plasticity in the adult human brain. The cognitive neuro-

sciences : 1243–1254.

8. Buonomano D, Merzenich M (1998) Cortical plasticity: from synapses to maps. Annual review of

neuroscience 21: 149–186.

9. Kolb B, Brown R, Witt-Lajeunesse A, Gibb R (2001) Neural compensations after lesion of the

cerebral cortex. Neural Plasticity 8: 1–16.

10. Hamdy S, Rothwell J, Aziz Q, Thompson D (2000) Organization and reorganization of human
swallowing motor cortex: implications for recovery after stroke. Clinical science 99: 151–157.

11. Nishibe M, Barbay S, Guggenmos D, Nudo RJ (2010) Reorganization of motor cortex after con-
trolled cortical impact in rats and implications for functional recovery. J Neurotrauma 27: 2221-
2232.

12. Sober S, Stark J, Yamasaki D, Lytton W (1997) Receptive ﬁeld changes after strokelike cortical

ablation: a role for activation dynamics. J Neurophysiol 78: 3438-43.

13. Jones E, Manger P, Woods T (1997) Maintenance of a somatotopic cortical map in the face of
diminishing thalamocortical inputs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 94: 11003.

14. Jones E, Pons T (998) Thalamic and brainstem contributions to large-scale plasticity of primate

somatosensory cortex. Science 282: 1121.

15. Daniel B, Kvasnak E, Frostig D (2004) Naturalistic experience transforms sensory maps in the

adult cortex of caged animals. Nature 429: 67–71.

23

Figure 12. Skin lesion type I (gray area). A Evolution of the receptive ﬁeld of neuron (25, 15)
during retraining after a skin lesion of type I. B Receptive ﬁelds of the whole model. C Response of the
model (after retraining) to a set of 10 × 10 regularly spaced stimuli. D This represents the mean
evolution of thalamo-cortical weights of neuron (25, 15) during retraining (i.e. E(25,15). E & F Histogram
of receptive ﬁeld sizes (100 bins) before (E) and after (F) skin lesion. The initial distribution is
Gaussian-shaped centered around a mean value of 0.02246. However, the ﬁnal distribution is a
Poison-like centered around a mean value of 0.2241 with a long tail indicating that there are a lot of
neurons whose RFs have underwent an expansion. At the same time an almost equivalent amount of
neurons has moved toward smaller RF sizes underlying that a shrinkage of RFs has taken place.

EFDBCA0.000.010.020.030.040.05020406080100mean0.02250.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.14020406080100mean0.0224050015000.000.020.040.060.080.10250035005000100000.000.020.040.060.080.100.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Epoch = 050150035001000024

Figure 13. Skin lesion type III (gray area). A Evolution of the receptive ﬁeld of neuron (25, 15)
during retraining after a skin lesion of type III. B Receptive ﬁelds of the whole model. C Response of
the model (after retraining) to a set of 10 × 10 regularly spaced stimuli. D This represents the mean
evolution of thalamo-cortical weights of neuron (25, 15) during retraining (i.e. E(25,15). E & F Histogram
of receptive ﬁeld sizes (100 bins) before (E) and after (F) skin lesion. The initial distribution is
Gaussian-shaped centered around a mean value of 0.02246. Although, the ﬁnal distribution is a
Poison-like centered around a mean value of 0.2248 with a long tail indicating that there are a lot of
neurons whose RFs have underwent an expansion. At the same time an almost equivalent amount of
neurons has moved toward smaller RF sizes underlying that a shrinkage of RFs has taken place.

EFDBCA0.000.010.020.030.040.05020406080100mean0.02250.000.020.040.060.080.100.12020406080100mean0.0225050015000.000.020.040.060.080.10250035005000100000.000.020.040.060.080.100.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Epoch = 050150035001000025

Figure 14. Receptive ﬁelds of model after a cortical lesion type III. A RFs of the whole
cortical sheet and B a magniﬁcation of surrounded, by the white box, area.

16. Feldman D (2009) Synaptic mechanisms for plasticity in neocortex. Annual review of neuroscience

32: 33.

17. Hickmott P, Merzenich M (2002) Local circuit properties underlying cortical reorganization. Jour-

nal of neurophysiology 88: 1288.

18. Florence S, Taub H, Kaas J (1998) Large-scale sprouting of cortical connections after peripheral

injury in adult macaque monkeys. Science 282: 1117.

19. Allen C, Celikel T, Feldman D (2003) Long-term depression induced by sensory deprivation during

cortical map plasticity in vivo. Nature neuroscience 6: 291–299.

20. Petersen C (2003) The barrel cortex–integrating molecular, cellular and systems physiology.

Pﬂugers Archiv European Journal of Physiology 447: 126–134.

21. Foeller E, Feldman D (2004) Synaptic basis for developmental plasticity in somatosensory cortex.

Current opinion in neurobiology 14: 89–95.

22. Rioult-Pedotti M, Friedman D, Donoghue J (2000) Learning-induced ltp in neocortex. Science 290:

533.

23. Kleim J, Hogg T, VandenBerg P, Cooper N, Bruneau R, et al. (2004) Cortical synaptogenesis and
motor map reorganization occur during late, but not early, phase of motor skill learning. The
Journal of neuroscience 24: 628.

24. Tremere L, Hicks T, Rasmusson D (2001) Role of inhibition in cortical reorganization of the adult
raccoon revealed by microiontophoretic blockade of gabaareceptors. Journal of Neurophysiology
86: 94.

25. Dinse H, Ragert P, Pleger B, Schwenkreis P, Tegenthoﬀ M (2003) Pharmacological modulation of

perceptual learning and associated cortical reorganization. Science 301: 91.

AB26

26. Clarey J, Tweedale R, Calford M (1996) Interhemispheric modulation of somatosensory receptive

ﬁelds: evidence for plasticity in primary somatosensory cortex. Cerebral Cortex 6: 196.

27. Mountcastle V (1978) An organizing principle for cerebral function: the unit model and the dis-
In: Edelman G, Mountcastle V, editors, The Mindful Brain, MIT Press. pp.

tributed system.
7–50.

28. Krubitzer L, Kaas J (1990) The organization and connections of somatosensory cortex in mar-

mosets. The Journal of Neuroscience 10: 952.

29. Buxhoeveden D, Casanova M (2002) The minicolumn hypothesis in neuroscience. Brain 125: 935.

30. Mountcastle V (1997) The columnar oganization of the neocortex. Brain 120: 701–722.

31. Douglas R, Martin K (2007) Recurrent neuronal circuits in the neocortex. Current biology: CB

17: R496.

32. Ho N, Destexhe A (2000) Synaptic background activity enhances the responsiveness of neocortical

pyramidal neurons. Journal of neurophysiology 84: 1488–1496.

33. Chance F, Abbott L, Reyes A (2002) Gain modulation from background synaptic input. Neuron

35: 773–782.

34. Bruno R, Sakmann B (2006) Cortex is driven by weak but synchronously active thalamocortical

synapses. Science 312: 1622.

35. Khazipov R, Luhmann H (2006) Early patterns of electrical activity in the developing cerebral

cortex of humans and rodents. Trends in Neurosciences 29: 414–418.

36. Khazipov R, Sirota A, Leinekugel X, Holmes G, Ben-Ari Y, et al. (2004) Early motor activity

drives spindle bursts in the developing somatosensory cortex. Nature 432: 758–761.

37. Yuste R, Nelson D, Rubin W, Katz L (1995) Neuronal domains in developing neocortex: mecha-

nisms of coactivation. Neuron 14: 7–17.

38. Kohonen T (1982) Self-organized formation of topologically correct feature maps. Biological Cy-

bernetics 43: 59-69.

39. Kohonen T, Schroeder MR, Huang TS, editors (2001) Self-Organizing Maps. Springer-Verlag New

York, Inc.

40. Edelman G, Mountcastle V, Program NR (1978) The mindful brain: cortical organization and the

group-selective theory of higher brain function. MIT Press.

41. Pearson J, Finkel L, Edelman G (1987) Plasticity in the organization of adult cerebral cortical
maps: A computer simulation based on neuronal group selection. Journal of Neuroscience 7:
4209–4223.

42. Pare M, Smith A, Rice F (2002) Distribution and terminal arborizations of cutaneous mechanore-
ceptors in the glabrous ﬁnger pads of the monkey. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 445:
347–359.

43. Merzenich M, Kaas J, Wall J, Nelson R, Sur M, et al. (1983) Topographic reorganization of somaten-
sory cortical areas 3b and 1 in adult monkeys following restricted deaﬀerentation. Neuroscience 8:
33–55.

27

44. Moll R, Moll I, Franke W (1984) Identiﬁcation of merkel cells in human skin by speciﬁc cytok-
eratin antibodies: changes of cell density and distribution in fetal and adult plantar epidermis.
Diferentiation 28: 136–154.

45. Goodwin A, Browning A, Wheat H (1995) Representation of curved surfaces in responses of
mechanoreceptive aﬀerent ﬁbers innervating the monkeys ﬁngerpad. The Journal of Neuroscience
15: 798–810.

46. Hsiao S, J Y (2008) Neural basis of haptic perception. In: M G, editor, Human haptic perception:

basics and applications, Birkhauser. pp. 103–112.

47. Amari S (1977) Dynamics of pattern formation in lateral-inhibition type neural ﬁelds. Biological

Cybernetics 27: 77-87.

48. Kishimoto K, Amari S (1979) Existence and stability of local excitations in homogeneous neural

ﬁelds. Journal of Mathematical Biology 7: 303-318.

49. Taylor J (1999) Neural bubble dynamics in two dimensions: foundations. Biological Cybernetics

80: 393–409.

50. Coombes S (2005) Waves, bumps, and patterns in neural ﬁeld theories. Biol Cybern 93: 91–108.

51. Hutt A, Rougier N (2010) Activity spread and breathers induced by ﬁnite transmission speeds in
two-dimensional neural ﬁelds. Physical Review Letter E : Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter
Physics 82.

52. Salinas E, Abbott L (1996) A model of multiplicative neural responses in parietal cortex. Proceed-

ings of the national academy of sciences 93: 11956.

53. Hahnloser R, Seung H, Slotine J (2003) Permitted and forbidden sets in symmetric threshold-linear

networks. Neural Computation 15: 621–638.

54. Werner H, Richter T (2001) Circular stationary solutions in two-dimensional neural ﬁelds. Biolog-

ical Cybernetics 85: 211-217.

55. Rougier N, Boniface Y (2011) Dynamic self-organising map. Neurocomputing 74.

56. Oja E (1982) Simpliﬁed neuron model as a principal component analyzer. Journal of Mathematical

Biology 15: 267–273.

57. Florence S, Taub H, Kaas J (1998) Large-scale sprouting of cortical connections after peripheral

injury in adult macaque monkeys. Science 282: 1117.

58. Sur M, Garraghty P, Bruce C (1985) Somatosensory cortex in macaque monkeys: laminar diﬀer-

ences in receptive ﬁeld size in areas 3b and 1. Brain research 342: 391–395.

59. Joublin F, F S, Wacquant S, Dinse H (1996) A columnar model of somatosensory reorganizational

plasticity based on hebbian and non-hebbian learning rules. Biological Cybernetics 74: 275–286.

60. Xing J, Gerstein G (1996) Networks with lateral connectivity. i. dynamic properties mediated by

the balance of intrinsic excitation and inhibition. Journal of Neurophysiology 75: 184–199.

61. Xing J, Gerstein G (1996) Networks with lateral connectivity. ii. development of neuronal grouping

and corresponding receptive ﬁeld changes. Journal of Neurophysiology 75: 200–216.

28

62. Xing J, Gerstein G (1996) Networks with lateral connectivity. iii. plasticity and reorganization of

somatosensory cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology 75: 217-232.

63. Florence S, Jain N, Kaas J (1997) Plasticity of somatosensory cortex in primates. In: Seminars in

neuroscience. Elsevier, volume 9, pp. 3–12.

64. Turrigiano G, Nelson S (2000) Hebb and homeostasis in neuronal plasticity. Current opinion in

neurobiology 10: 358–364.

65. Abraham W (2008) Metaplasticity: tuning synapses and networks for plasticity. Nature Reviews

Neuroscience 9: 387–399.

66. Katz LC, Shatz CJ (1996) Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical circuits. Science 274:

1133-1138.

67. Knight R, Richard Staines W, Swick D, Chao L (1999) Prefrontal cortex regulates inhibition and

excitation in distributed neural networks. Acta Psychologica 101: 159–178.

68. Schaefer M, Heinze H, Rotte M (2005) Task-relevant modulation of primary somatosensory cortex

suggests a prefrontal-cortical sensory gating system. Neuroimage 27: 130–135.

