The adaptive value of probability distortion and risk-seeking in
macaques’ decision-making Aurélien Nioche, Nicolas P. Rougier, Marc
Deffains, Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde,

Sébastien Ballesta, Thomas Boraud

To cite this version:

Aurélien Nioche, Nicolas P. Rougier, Marc Deffains, Sacha
Bourgeois-Gironde, Sébastien Ballesta, et al.. The adaptive value of
probability distortion and risk-seeking in macaques’ decision-making.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
2021, 376 (1819), pp.20190668. ￿10.1098/rstb.2019.0668￿.
￿hal-03005035v2￿

HAL Id: hal-03005035

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03005035v2

Submitted on 25 Mar 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

The adaptive value of probability distortion and risk-seeking in
macaques’ decision-making

A. Nioche1, †, N.P. Rougier2,3,4,5, †, M. Deﬀains3,4, S.
Bourgeois-Gironde6,7,8, S. Ballesta9,10, ‡, T. Boraud3,4,11, ‡, *

(1) Department of Communications and Networking, Aalto University,
    Finland,
(2) Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 33405 Talence, France; (3) Institut des
    Maladies Neurodégénératives, Université de Bordeaux, 33000 Bordeaux,
    France; (4) In- stitut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, CNRS, UMR
    5293, 33000 Bordeaux, France; (5) LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux,
    INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, 33405 Talence, France; (6) Laboratoire
    d’Economie Mathématique et de Microéconomie Appliquée, Université
    Panthéon-Assas, 75006 Paris, France; (7) Institut Jean Nicod,
    Département d’Etudes Cognitives, ENS, EHESS, PSL Research Uni-
    versity, 75005 Paris, France; (8) Institut Jean Nicod, CNRS, UMR
    8129; (9) Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives et Adaptatives,
    UMR 7364, 67000 Strasbourg, France; (10) Centre de Primatologie de
    l’Université de Strasbourg, 67207 Niederhausbergen, France. (11)
    Centre Expert Parkinson, CHU Bordeaux, 33000 Bordeaux, France.

† These authors have contributed equally to this work. ‡ These authors
also have contributed equally to this work. * Corresponding author:
thomas.boraud@u-bordeaux.fr

Keywords: Genetic algorithm, Cognitive biases, Monkey, Autonomous Cogni-
tive Testing, Experimental economics

Abstract

In humans, the attitude toward risk is not neutral and is dissimilar
between bets involving gains and bets involving losses. The existence
and prevalence of these decision features in non-human primates are
unclear. In addition, only a few studies have tried to simulate the
evolution of agents based on their attitude toward risk. Therefore, we
still ignore to which extent Prospect theory’s claims are evolutionary
rooted. To shed light on this issue, we collected data in 9 macaques
that performed bets involving gains or losses. We conﬁrmed that their
overall behaviour is coherent with Prospect theory’s claims. In
parallel, we used a genetic algorithm to simulate the evolution of a
population of agents across several generations. We showed that the
algorithm selects progressively agents that exhibit risk-seeking and an
inverted S-shape distorted perception of probability. We compared these
two results and found that monkeys’ attitude toward risk when facing
losses only is congruent with the simulation. This result is consistent
with the idea that gambling in the loss domain is analogous to deciding
in a context of life-threatening challenges where a certain level of
risk-seeking behaviours and probability distortions may be adaptive.

1

Introduction

Making decisions with uncertain outcomes leads to solving a trade-oﬀ. A
decision- maker’s attitude towards risk depends on his/her capacity to
value quantities and perceive probabilities. Prospect theory oﬀers a
framework to deﬁne this attitude toward risk that relies on two key
concepts: (i) choices are performed according to a reference point with
respect to which expected gains and losses are contrasted; the
evaluation of quantities is captured by the shape of the utility
function and reference-dependence entails risk aversion in the domain of
gains (concave utility function) and risk-seeking in the domain of
losses (convex utility function). (ii) The perception of the
probabilities of the outcomes, described by the shape of the probability
weighting function, is non-linear.

An increasing number of studies have tackled the biological relevance of
Prospect Theory claims [1–7]. In the domain of gains, risk aversion has
been reported in several taxa, including rodents [8], birds [9], insects
[10] and plants [11]. In apes and monkeys, a variable level of
risk-seeking behaviour has been observed [12] and only few studies
[13,14] reported risk aversion (see [15], published in the same theme
issue, for an exhaustive review of the literature in rhesus monkey
[macaca mulatta]). Attitude toward risk in losses has seldom been
reported in independent studies [15]. Prospect theory’s claim of an
asymmetry risk-aversion for gains/risk-seeking for losses per se has
been assessed speciﬁcally in few studies [15]. An asymmetry similar to
the one observed in humans has been reported in capuchins [16] and in
Rhesus macaque [17] but other studies have not found any asymmetry for
the latter [15]. Interestingly, this absence of asymmetry has also been
reported in rodents [8]. Overall, these observed variability in
primates’ attitude toward risk can be partly explained by contextual
factors or sampling eﬀect [18–21].

Concerning probability distortion, the picture seems clearer. Rhesus and
rats, for instance, perceive rare events as more probable than events
that have a higher probability to occur and vice-versa [8,17,22,23].
This consistency across species, despite individual variability,
possibly implies that probability distortion is likely to be anchored at
a basic neurobiological level [24,25], but more data need to be
collected.

The patchy nature of the data collected up to now, concerning both the
shape of the utility and probability functions in primates, calls for
more comprehensive studies that assess the whole span of Prospect theory
in larger populations in order to assess both intraindividual and
interindividual variability, in more ecological conditions.

In addition, little is known about the adaptive value of the shape of
the probability weighting function and the asymmetry of the utility
function [26].

The goal of this study is therefore threefold: (i) to conﬁrm the data
previously collected with two rhesus macaques [17] using a larger number
of animals, in more ecologically-valid conditions (i.e. semi-free
ranging Tonkean macaques exposed to autonomous learning and testing
devices); (ii) to address the adaptive

2

value of the non-linearity of the utility and probability weighting
function using a genetic algorithm-based simulation and (iii) to compare
the above two ﬁndings.

Materials and Methods

Ethics

Experiments were conducted at the Centre de Primatologie (CdP) de
l’Université de Strasbourg, (Niederhausbergen, France; LNCA UMR-7364)
and Institut des Maladies Neurodegeneratives (IMN, CNRS, UMR-5293,
University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux). At the University of Strasbourg,
experiments were approved by the ethical committee of the Primate Centre
of the University of Strasbourg (CdP), which is authorized to house
non-human primates (registration n°B6732636). The research further
complied with the EU Directive 2010/63/EU for animal experiments. At the
IMN, experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the
Council Directive of 2010 (2010/63/EU) of the European Community and the
National Institute of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals. The protocol received agreement from the Ethical Committee for
Animal Research CE50 (registration n°C33063268).

Subjects

At the University of Strasbourg, we collected data on one social group
of Tonkean macaques (Macaca tonkeana), housed at the CdP. Animals lived
in semi-free ranging conditions in a wooded park of 3788m2 with
permanent access to an indoor-outdoor shelter (2,5x7.5m - 2x4m). The
group included 23 individuals with even sex ratio among adults, which is
comparable to the composition of wild groups [27]. All subjects have
research experiences in cognitive testing using touchscreens. Amongst
the 23 individuals, 14 were involved in this current study, however only
7 were suﬃciently trained or performed our economic task without a
signiﬁcant side bias (<80%) to be included in this report. The species
Macaca tonkeana is a member of a group of closely-related Sulawesi
macaque species, all living in multi-male and multi-female egalitarian
and highly tolerant societies [28,29]. Indeed, compared to other species
of macaques, Sulawesi macaques social interactions are more complex and
more inﬂuenced by friendships than by dominance and kinships [29–33].
However, the non-social cognition skills of Tonkean macaques seem to be
comparable to those observed in other species of macaques [34].
Unfortunately, due to demographic heterogeneity and small size of the
experimental population for each species (see Table S1), the comparison
of economic decisions of Tonkean macaques with rhesus monkeys is beyond
the scope of this actual study. However, we believe that the
experimental methods reported here are particularly adapted to the
future study of potential variations in economic decision-making in
diﬀerent species of primates. Water was provided ad libitum and monkeys
were fed with commercial primate pellets twice a day and received fresh
fruit and vegetables once a week. At the IMN, the study was performed on
two female Rhesus macaques: Hav (born in 2012) and Gla (born in 2011).
Animals were housed in the animal facility of the IMN under standard
conditions (a 12h light/dark cycle with the light on from 7 am to 7 pm;
humidity

3

at 60%, temperature 22±2°C). During the time of the experiment, animals
had controlled access to water ﬁve days per week. They were fed with
commercial primate pellets once a day, and received fresh fruit and
vegetables once a week. The 9 animals (5 males and 4 females) that
composed the ﬁnal experimental cohort weighed 10±3.1 kg and were 6.8±2
years old.

Data collection

At the University of Strasbourg, data were collected using four Machines
for Automated Learning and Testing (MALT), which were directly
accessible to the monkeys from their living environment (Fig1a,b).
Several cognitive tasks were available to the macaques at the MALT
presented via a touchscreen interface [35]. Each MALT was accessible
freely 24/7, except for two-hours cleaning and reﬁll sessions, at least
once a week. MALT allows automatic identiﬁcation of each subject using
an RFID dual-detection system [36]. For that purpose, subjects were all
equipped with two RFID microchips (UNO MICRO ID / 12, ISO Transponder
2.12 * 12mm), injected into each forearm during the macaques’ veterinary
health check under appropriate anaesthesia, to individually identify
them when using MALT (Fig1bc). At the IMN, data were daily collected
(~1h/session, ~5 sessions/week). During each session, animals were
seated in a primate restraint chair located in a dark room equipped with
a video monitoring system and faced a touchscreen on which the task was
displayed (Fig1d). A resting bar was mounted in the lower part of the
chair at waist level to accurately measure arm-reaching movement
parameters. The behavioural and video data were stored on a separate
computer located outside the room for further analysis.

Each monkey performed between 11,681 and 51,853 trials. Some semi-free
ranging subjects (Tonkeans) were not performing the task optimally and
adopted alternative response strategies. Indeed, ﬁve tested individuals
chose the target on one side in more than 80% of the cases (in lotteries
involving either gains or losses) and were consequently not included in
this study. Two other individuals were also not considered because they
performed less than 2,000 trials. Concerning the Rhesus monkeys, we
recorded overall 54904 trials of which 39853 (72.59%) had already been
used for a previous publication [17].

Task

The task is adapted from Nioche et al. [17], without any major change
and is shown in Fig2.

Lottery: We consider simple lotteries L ∈ L, that can be deﬁned as a
tuple (x, p), such that if L = (x, p), it yields the outcome x ∈ R, with
probability p ∈ [0, 1] and 0 with probability 1 − p. For all trials, the
probability of receiving (losing) tokens is drawn from the set p ∈
{0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.00}.

Choice: Each choice has to be made between two lotteries L1 = (x1 p1)
and L2 = (x2 p2) .

Rewards: The monkey starts each trial with 3 tokens and can gain up to 3
tokens and lose up to 3 tokens. At the end of the trial, the monkey
would be rewarded

4

with liquid reward proportional to the tokens earned (between 0 and 6
tokens at the end of each trial). At the University of Strasbourg,
monkeys could be rewarded with diluted syrup (1/10; 1 token of reward
corresponds to .25 mL of liquid reward; Fig2) and at the IMN, with
diluted apple sauce (1/3, 1 token corresponds to .1 mL of liquid
reward).

Experimental paradigm

At the beginning of the trial, a gauge with 3 tokens is displayed
(Fig2bc). In Bordeaux, the monkey has to grasp a grip (i.e. resting bar
at waist level) for a short duration that varies randomly in a range
from trial to trial (150 ~ 300 ms) to ensure that the monkey can not
anticipate the stimuli display. If the monkey does not hold the grip
long enough, the trial is considered to be failed and an error is
raised. If an error is raised, the screen turns to black, and the monkey
has to wait 2,000 ms for the beginning of the next trial. In case the
monkey holds the grip for the required amount of time, two circles
representing two lotteries appear on the screen. The monkey has 2,000 ms
to decide which lottery to choose. If the monkey does not choose within
the allotted decision time, an error is raised. Once one lottery is
selected by touching the corresponding circle, the other circle
disappears. The monkey has 5,000 ms to return its hand to the grip
(otherwise, an error is raised). Once the monkey returns its hand to the
grip, the outcome is determined based on the probabilities shown in the
two slices of the chosen circle. The amount of reward (loss) is
indicated to the animal by the disappearance of the slice corresponding
to the non-occurring output. The gauge is ﬁlled (emptied) by the amount
earned (forfeited), one token at the time. The time of the ﬁlling
animation is 1,500 ms. The inter-trial interval varied randomly between
150 and 300 ms.

At the University of Strasbourg, similar experiments were performed
using touch- screens only. The experiment started with a central
coloured square. Directly (25 ms) after the subject touched this cue,
two circles representing two lotteries appeared on the screen. The
animal had 15,000 ms to decide which lottery to choose. After making a
choice by touching one of the two circles the other circle disappeared.
On the remaining circle, the outcome was determined based on the
probabilities shown in the two slices of the chosen circle. The gauge
ﬁlled (emptied) by the amount earned (forfeited), all tokens at the
time. During reward delivery, auditory feedback (bell sound) was played
for each token earned by the subject. The gauge and tokens stayed on the
screen for 8,000 ms plus a 500 ms intertrial interval where the screen
was left black.

Modelling of monkeys’ decisions

We characterize the monkeys’ decision-making using a model based on the
Prospect Theory [26,37], similar to the one used in Nioche et al. [17].

Probability weighting function and probability distortion. Following
Prelec [38] the subjective probability perception is deﬁned as:

w(p) = e−(− ln p)α

(1) 

5

with p ∈ (0, 1] the actual probability, and with α ∈ (0, ∞), a free
parameter indicating the distortion of the probability perception. We
assume that w(0) = 0. For α ∈ (0, 1), the closer α is to zero, the more
the small probabilities are overestimated, and the large probabilities
underestimated. For α = 1, the subjective probabilities are the same as
the objective probabilities. For α ∈ (1, ∞), the higher α, the more the
small probabilities are underestimated, and the large probabilities
overestimated.

Utility function and risk aversion. The utility of a normalized outcome
x ∈ [−1, 1] is deﬁned as:

u(x) =

 



x1−β −|x|1+β 0

if x > 0, if x < 0, otherwise.

(2) 

with β ∈ R a free parameter describing the risk-aversion of the
decision-maker [39]. If β is positive, u00 is negative, indicating
risk-averse preferences [40], if β is negative, u00 is positive,
indicating risk-seeking preferences, if β is equal to 0, ∀x : u(x) = x
and u00(x) = 0, indicating risk-neutral preferences.

Subjective expected utility and side bias. The subjective expected
utility of a lottery L is given by:

SEU (L = (x, p)) =

 



w(p)u(x) − γ w(p)u(x) + γ w(p)u(x)

if γ < 0 and L is on the left, if γ > 0 and L is on the right,
otherwise.

(3) 

with γ ∈ R, a free parameter describing to which extent the
decision-maker is biased towards one side. If γ = 0, the decision-maker
is not biased. Otherwise, the higher γ, the more he is biased towards
the right, the lower γ, the more he is biased towards the left.

Choice probability and stochasticity. We also assume that action
selection is probabilistic: the option that has the highest subjective
utility is chosen only with a probability greater than the other
options, and not with certainty. We model this stochasticity with a
classic softmax function [41] such as the probability of choosing the
lottery Li is given by:

p(choice = Li) =

1

1 + e−

SEU (Li)−SEU (Lj ) λ

(4) 

with Lj the alternative option, and λ ∈ (0, ∞) a free parameter
describing to which extent decision-making is stochastic. The higher λ,
the more the decision-making is stochastic.

Data analysis

We will consider separately the choices involving only potential gains
(xi∈1,2 > 0) and only potential losses (xi∈1,2 < 0). Furthermore, we
will distinguish two groups of choices.

6

Group 1. There is a better response regardless of the risk attitude of
the decision- maker: there is i, j ∈ {1, 2} s.t. pi ≥ pj and xi > xj, or
pi > pj and xi ≥ xj, (30 diﬀerent pairs of lotteries for gains, 30 for
losses ignoring the order/side of presentation—60 otherwise);

Group 2. A trade-oﬀ between risk and potential gain/loss has to be done:
there is i, j ∈ {1, 2} s.t. pi > pj and xi < xj (18 diﬀerent pairs of
lotteries for gains, 18 for losses ignoring the order/side of
presentation—36 otherwise).

The choices from Group 1 are used as control and choices from Group2 to
assess attitude towards risk.

Control 1: Performance assessment. Lottery pairs with a better response
(Group 1) are used to assess the monkeys’ performance. We consider
speciﬁcally the cases where it exists i, j ∈ {1, 2} s.t.:

• [Same p] pi = pj but xi > xj in order to assess the discrimination of
the quantities (12 diﬀerent pairs of lotteries for gains, 12 for losses
ignoring the order/side of presentation—24 otherwise);

• [Same x] xi = xj but pi > pj in order to assess the discrimination of
the probabilities (18 diﬀerent pairs of lotteries for gains, 18 for
losses ignoring the order/side of presentation—36 otherwise).

We model the probability of choosing the right option depending on the
diﬀerence of expected values using an ordinary sigmoid function: 1 +
e−k(∆−x0)(cid:17)

p(∆) = 1/

(5) 

(cid:16)

with ∆ the diﬀerence of expected values between the lottery on the right
and the lottery on the left, k the slope parameter, and x0 the intercept
parameter. We used a Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (SciPy library) to
optimize the parameters.

Control 2: Consideration of the diﬀerence between expected values when
trading- oﬀ between quantity and probability. Results for lottery pairs
with a trade-oﬀ between quantity and probability (Group 2) are used to
check if the frequency with which the riskiest option is chosen is
dependent on the diﬀerence between the expected values of the safest
option and of the riskiest option.

We model this relation using an ordinary sigmoid function:

p(∆) = 1/

(cid:16)

1 + e−k(∆−x0)(cid:17)

(6) 

with ∆ the diﬀerence of expected values between the riskiest lottery and
the safest lottery, k the slope parameter, and x0 the intercept
parameter. We used a Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (SciPy library) to
optimize the parameters.

Assessment of the attitude towards risk. The choices from Group 2 are
used to characterize the attitude toward risk. To this end, separately
for each monkey

7

and for choices involving potential losses and for choices involving
potential gains, we optimize the free parameters of our model (θ = {α,
β, γ, λ}), using an SLSQP optimization algorithm [42] (Scipy Library),
in order to maximize the likelihood of the data given the model. More
precisely, the log-likelihood is estimated as follows:

ln L(O | θ) =

ln p(oi | θ)

(7) 

|O| X

i

for θ = {α, β, γ, λ} a set of parameter values, and with O the set of
observation under consideration, p the probability according to our
decision-making model of making the choice oi ∈ O given θ.

To assess the stability of the ﬁt, we binned the trials by chunks of 200
trials by chronological order for each monkey, and optimize separately
for each chunk the free parameters of the model.

Simulations

The simulation is based on a genetic algorithm [43]. We consider a set L
= {l1, …lNL} of lotteries where each lottery l1 is described by a
probability pi = i/NL of reward and an associated reward xi = 1/pi such
that the expected value of each lottery is equal to 1. We consider a set
A = {a1, …, aNA } of agents where each agent ak is fully described by a
couple of parameters (αk, βk). When asked to choose between lotteries li
and lj, the choice of agent ak is:

choice(ak, li, lj) =

( i j

if wαk (pi)uβk (xi) > wαk (pj)uβk (xj) otherwise

(8) 

with wα : [0, 1] → [0, 1], the probability weighting function w
described above with a value of distortion parameter equal to α and uβ :
R → R, the utility function u described above with risk aversion
parameter equal to β.

The initial population A0 is built from a set of parameters α and β
being uniformly drawn from [αmin, αmax] × [βmin, βmax] such that we have
a0

k = {αk, βk}.

At each epoch, each agent completes a set of NT trials. Each trial is
composed of two lotteries randomly and uniformly drawn for the set L.
Individual gains are computed according to the agent’s choices, and a
proportion of the best scorers is selected using a selection rate γ that
may vary depending on the simulation (see results section). The next
generation is computed by iteratively selecting two random parents among
the selected agents and by computing the linear interpolation of their
respective parameters (α and β) such as to generate two i and an agent
an oﬀsprings. More precisely, considering an agent an j at epoch n, we
generate two new agents an+1 k+1 using a random and uniform factor λ
∈]0, ε[ (ε being the mixture rate) such that:

and an+1

k

an+1 k = (λαn an+1 k+1 = ((1 − λ)αn

i + (1 − λ)αn j + λαn

j , λβn i , (1 − λ)βn

i + (1 − λ)βn j ) j + λβn i )

(9) 

8

The procedure is iterated until we reach a population whose size is the
same as the initial population. After this new population has been
generated, we apply a mutation of a small proportion of the new agents
using a mutation rate δ such that δ × NA agents beneﬁt from a random
mutation. This mutation consists of replacing the agent’s set of
parameters by values randomly drawn from [αmin, αmax] × [βmin, βmax].
The whole procedure is iterated for a ﬁxed number of epochs NE.

Statistics

To compare measures, we used a Wilcoxon signed-rank (for paired data)
and rank-sum test (for independent data) with p < 0.05. We also consider
that monkeys’ behaviours were signiﬁcantly biased based on the 95%
conﬁdence intervals given by the best ﬁt parameter value of the model.

Results

Monkeys’ attitude toward risk

We analysed the results of 9 macaques monkeys that performed a total of
256 976 trials (28 553±12 609 per subject). Each trial consisted of a
bet involving either gains or losses. We assessed the performance of the
monkeys, by evaluating how they consider the diﬀerence of expected value
between the available options. On average, monkeys were sensible to the
diﬀerence of expected value between the two options. Supplementary
section provides details about each individual behaviour (FigS1-S3 and
Table S1-S8). Monkeys were sensible to the diﬀerence of expected value
between the two options when probabilities were equal but amounts diﬀer
(Fig3a,d) for 8/9 individuals in the gain domain and 7/9 in the loss
domain (95% conﬁdence intervals of the best ﬁt parameter value). Monkeys
were also sensible to options when amounts were equal but probability
diﬀers (Fig3b,e) for 9/9 subjects in the gain and the loss domains and
when there is a trading-oﬀ between quantity and probability (Fig3c,f ),
for 9/9 and 6/9 individuals for the gain and the loss domain,
respectively.

Based on the Prospect theory [26,37], we characterize the probability
weighting function (i.e. subjective perception of probabilities), the
utility function (i.e. subjective valuation of the rewards), the
stochasticity in choice (i.e. to which extent choices reﬂect subjective
expected utilities), and the side bias for each individual. On average,
the best-ﬁt values of the risk aversion parameter of the macaques’
utility functions are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for gains and losses
(Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.0039). The recovered utility functions
are respectively concave in the gains domain, indicating risk-averse
preferences (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.02, Fig4a) and convex in the
losses domain, indicating risk-seeking preferences (Wilcoxon signed-rank
test, p=0.0039, Fig4d), reproducing the known asymmetry. Monkeys also
overweight small probabilities both in the losses and gains domains
(Fig4b,e; Wilcoxon signed-rank test, both p=0.0039). This distortion is
slightly more pronounced for losses than gains but did not reach a
signiﬁcant threshold (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.098). The steepness
of the softmax function that ﬁt their choice probabilities given the

9

subjective expected utilities (Fig4e,f ) was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
between the gain and the loss domain (Wilcoxon signed-rank test,
p=0.36). The side bias in their decisions was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
between the gain and the loss domain (Wilcoxon signed-rank test,
p=0.91). Supplementary section provides details about each individual
(FigS4-S5).

Evolution of attitude toward risk in a population of artiﬁcial agents

Unless stated otherwise, we use the parameters given in Table 1 for all
the simulations. The initial and ﬁnal populations are respectively
depicted in Fig5a,b and Fig5c,d. The thick black lines indicate the mean
probability weighting function (Fig5c) and the mean utility function
(Fig5d) over the whole population at the end of the selection process.

Overall, Fig5 reveals that more than 95% of the agents in the ﬁnal
population tend to overestimate low probabilities and under-estimate
high probabilities (see FigS6c). It also appears that more than 95% of
the agents in the ﬁnal population have a convex utility function,
indicating risk-seeking behaviour (see FigS6d).

The mean gain of a subset of the artiﬁcial agents depending on the
shapes on their probability weighting and utility functions is depicted
in Fig6. The mean gain of best individuals is sometimes better than the
expected value, allowing the selection process to be eﬃcient. As
expected, an overestimation of small probabilities and underestimation
of high probabilities (β = 0.6) leads to higher gains with only a
marginal inﬂuence of the utility. When there is no distortion of
probabilities (β = 1.0), only the utility function inﬂuences the mean
gain of the luckiest agents. For an underestimation of small
probabilities and overestimation of high probabilities (β = 1.4), the
inﬂuence of the utility function is negligible.

The exact shape of the ﬁnal population’s functions is dependent on the
selection rate, mutation rate and mixture rate as shown in Fig7.
However, the inﬂuence of the mutation rate is small, as is the inﬂuence
of the mixture rate, and for neighbouring values of the selection rate
(between 5% and 30%), the shapes of the curves remain similar to the
ones shown in Fig5. Though, if the selection rate is very large (45% or
higher), the shapes of the curves are inverted: the probability
weighting function would be S-shaped (instead of inverted S-shaped),
indicating a low probabilities underestimation and a high probabilities
overestimation, and the utility function would be convex, indicating
risk-averse preferences. Further analysis of the evolution and inﬂuence
of parameters on the distribution of the ﬁnal population are provided in
Figures S7-13.

Comparison between monkeys’ and agents’ populations

We compared the observations made in monkeys and the observations made
in artiﬁcial agents. Fig8a,b summarizes the results of this analysis.

As the exact characteristics of the ﬁnal population depend on the
selection rate, we report statistical results for a selection parameter
included in the set {0.05, 0.1, . . . , 0.35}, that is values
neighbouring the one used for the results

10

presented in Fig5 (±0.15). The probability weighting function has an
inverted S-shape both in populations of monkeys and selected artiﬁcial
agents. The values of the probability distortion parameter between the
populations of monkeys and selected artiﬁcial agents are not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for gains (Fig8b, Wilcoxon rank-sum, all p>0.05,
common language eﬀect size [44], f = [0.32 , 0.58]) and less robustly
for losses (Fig8b, Wilcoxon rank-sum, for γ ∈ [0.05, 0.2], all p>0.05, f
= [0.49, 0.63] and for γ ∈ [0.25, 0.35], all p<0.05, f = [0.12, 0.29]).
On the other hand, the values of the risk aversion parameter are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for gains (Fig8b, Wilcoxon rank-sum, all p<0.001,
f = [0.91, 1]) and, to a lesser extent, for losses (Fig8b, Wilcoxon
rank-sum, all p < 0.1, f = [0.12, 0.32]), although the values observed
for monkeys in the losses and artiﬁcial agents lead both to risk-seeking
preferences (convexity of the utility function).

Discussion

We measured probability distortion and risk aversion in nine macaque
monkeys of diﬀerent ages and genders, belonging to two species, by using
a similar task in diﬀerent experimental conditions. We found that,
overall, monkeys showed an inverted S-shape probability distortion
pattern. In addition, on average, animals were respectively risk-averse
for gains and risk-seeking for losses, conﬁrming an asymmetry of
treatment between gains and losses as we previously described [17]. Our
conclusions are drawn from a dataset that includes a reasonable number
of subjects and most of them voluntarily performed the task in
unconstrained environments, providing ecological validity to our
ﬁndings. Our results therefore reliably reproduce in two species of
non-human primates the classical pattern of the Prospect theory found in
humans [45]. It is still worth noting that a substantial level of
heterogeneity has been reported in the attitude of monkeys and humans
towards risk [21] (for more information see [15] published in this
special issue). Many confounding factors have been considered as the
source of this heterogeneity, such as the amount or the nature of
rewards, the kind of behavioural task or even the temporal organization
of trials within a given task. Further research is needed to better
understand the inﬂuence of these factors on primates’ decision-making.

Eﬃciency in foraging and reproduction has been optimized by natural
selection as individuals that followed sub-optimal strategies lost out
to competitors [46,47]. The classical inverted S-shape proﬁle of the
probability weighting function has been described in many diﬀerent
species, and it may be a ubiquitous characteristic of decision-making of
living organisms [8,22,23]. One can thus speculate that such decisional
strategy may be adaptive. The evolutionary advantages of the
non-linearity of the probability weighting and utility functions remain
debated [1–7]. Our results, that bring together real-life and simulation
data, oﬀer new insights into this issue.

Indeed, to assess if these cognitive biases may confer an evolutionary
advantage at the population level, we ran a simulation that allowed
agents to freely compete and select the decision strategies that had the
best ﬁtness. The results of this simulation show that the ﬁnal
population exhibits an inverted S-shaped

11

probability weighting function and a convex utility function. This
indicates that the selected decision-makers are those that have a
preference for risk (i.e. the convexity of the utility function) while
overestimating the small probabilities and underestimating the high
probabilities (i.e. the inverted S-shape of the probability weighting
function). Hence, in a context where the total number of choices is
limited, and the expected value is constant between the options, the
selection process promotes the lucky gamblers that are biased towards
the ‘high-stake’ bets (small probability and large reward). The strategy
with the better ﬁtness in our simulation is therefore congruent with the
behavioural pattern of the monkeys’ behaviour in losses.

Gambling in the loss domain can be arguably considered analogous to
deciding in a context of life-threatening challenges (e.g. predation
avoidance, social challenges). Cognitive adaptation in humans seems to
support this hypothesis [48]. For instance, loss cues attracted more
attentional resources than gain cues [49,50]. In real-life, suboptimal
decision-making in the gains domain may thus not lead to consequences as
dramatic as in the losses domain. Hence, one can speculate that diﬀerent
levels of selective pressure could have been applied to the biological
mechanisms responsible for decision-making under risk in the gain and
the loss domains, then fostering an asymmetry of treatment.

Our simulation did not capture this known asymmetry of treatment between
gains and losses in primates [26,37]. This was expected because, for
agents in the simulation, gains and losses were diﬀerentiated only by
their polarity. However, the mean decisional strategy adopted by monkeys
in the losses’ domain was the closest to the selected behaviors of
agents (both risk seeking). Several proposals may help to interpret this
result. First, satiety is known to inﬂuence economic decisions [51–54].
In real-life, losses could be arguably inﬁnite (i.e. losing social
status, territories, physical integrity or even facing death) whereas
accumulation of goods is usually limited by time and/or space (e.g.
limited accumulation of goods or satiety during foraging). These
features were not implemented in the simulation and may be good
candidates to better explain the known asymmetry of treatment between
gains and losses. Second, it has been noted that the emotional state of
subjects and/or social context of decisions can inﬂuence attitude toward
risk and loss aversion [19,55,56]. Our simulations did not consider
these other important features of biological agents. But despite these
limits, we found that the ﬁnal population of agents exhibit distorted
probability perception and non-linear utility function, thus showing
that these behavioural strategies can be adaptive in a given context of
decision-making. In conclusion, our study shows that integrating
simulation and real-life data provides new insights about the
evolutionary roots of cognitive biases, therefore reassessing the
biological dimension of the decision theory.

12

References

1.  Okasha S. 2007 Rational Choice, Risk Aversion, and Evolution. The
    Journal of Philosophy 104, 217–235.

2.  McDermott R, Fowler JH, Smirnov O. 2008 On the Evolutionary Ori- gin
    of Prospect Theory Preferences. The Journal of Politics 70, 335–350.
    (doi:10.1017/S0022381608080341)

3.  Houston AI, Fawcett TW, Mallpress DEW, McNamara JM. 2014 Clarifying
    the relationship between prospect theory and risk-sensitive foraging
    theory. Evolution and Human Behavior 35, 502–507.
    (doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2014.06.010)

4.  Rieger MO. 2014 Evolutionary stability of prospect theory
    preferences. Journal of Mathematical Economics 50, 1–11.
    (doi:10.1016/j.jmateco.2013.11.002)

5.  Hintze A, Olson RS, Adami C, Hertwig R. 2015 Risk sensitivity as an
    evolutionary adaptation. Sci Rep 5, 8242. (doi:10.1038/srep08242)

6.  Mallpress DEW, Fawcett TW, Houston AI, McNamara JM. 2015 Risk
    attitudes in a changing environment: An evolutionary model of the
    fourfold pattern of risk preferences. Psychological Review 122,
    364–375. (doi:10.1037/a0038970)

7.  Addessi E, Beran MJ, Bourgeois-Gironde S, Brosnan SF, Leca J- B.
    2020 Are the roots of human economic systems shared with non- human
    primates? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 109, 1–15.
    (doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.12.026)

8.  Constantinople CM, Piet AT, Brody CD. 2019 An Analysis of Decision
    under Risk in Rats. Current Biology 29, 2066-2074.e5.
    (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.013)

Caraco T. 1981 Energy budgets, risk and foraging preferences in Behav
Ecol Sociobiol 8, 213–217.

9.  dark-eyed juncos (Junco hyemalis). (doi:10.1007/BF00299833)

10. Harder LD, Real LA. 1987 Why are Bumble Bees Risk Averse? Ecology
    68, 1104–1108. (doi:10.2307/1938384)

11. Dener E, Kacelnik A, Shemesh H. 2016 Pea Plants Show Risk
    Sensitivity. Current Biology 26, 1763–1767.
    (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.05.008)

12. Sayers K, Menzel CR. 2017 Risk sensitivity, phylogenetic
    reconstruction, and four chimpanzees. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 71, 26.
    (doi:10.1007/s00265-016-2234-8)

13. Heilbronner SR, Rosati AG, Stevens JR, Hare B, Hauser MD. 2008 A
    fruit in the hand or two in the bush? Divergent risk preferences in
    chimpanzees and bonobos. Biol. Lett. 4, 246–249.
    (doi:10.1098/rsbl.2008.0081)

14. Eisenreich BR, Hayden BY, Zimmermann J. 2019 Macaques are
    risk-averse in a freely moving foraging task. Sci Rep 9, 15091.
    (doi:10.1038/s41598-019- 51442-z)

13

15. Garcia B, Cerrotti F, Palminteri S. 2020 The description-experience
gap: a challenge for the neuroeconomics of decision-making under
uncertainty. (doi:10.31234/osf.io/9s23f)

16. Lakshminarayanan VR, Chen MK, Santos LR. 2011 The evolution of
    decision-making under risk: Framing eﬀects in monkey risk
    preferences. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47, 689–693.
    (doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2010.12.011)

17. Nioche A, Bourgeois-Gironde S, Boraud T. 2019 An asymmetry of
    treatment between lotteries involving gains and losses in rhesus
    monkeys. Sci Rep 9, 10441. (doi:10.1038/s41598-019-46975-2)

18. Farashahi S, Azab H, Hayden B, Soltani A. 2018 On the Flexibil- ity
    of Basic Risk Attitudes in Monkeys. 38, 4383–4398.
    (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2260-17.2018)

J. Neurosci.

19. Rosati AG, Hare B. 2012 Decision making across social contexts:
    competition increases preferences for risk in chimpanzees and
    bonobos. Animal Behaviour 84, 869–879.
    (doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2012.07.010)

20. De Petrillo F, Paoletti M, Bellagamba F, Manzi G, Paglieri F,
    Addessi E. 2020 Contextual factors modulate risk preferences in
    adult humans. Behavioural Processes 176, 104137.
    (doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2020.104137)

21. Harrison GW, Elisabet Rutström E. 2008 Risk Aversion in the
    Laboratory. In Risk Aversion in Experiments (eds J C. Cox, G W.
    Harrison), pp. 41–196. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
    (doi:10.1016/S0193-2306(08)00003-3)

22. Stauﬀer WR, Lak A, Bossaerts P, Schultz W. 2015 Economic Choices
    Reveal Probability Distortion in Macaque Monkeys. Journal of
    Neuroscience 35, 3146–3154. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3653-14.2015)

23. Ferrari-Toniolo S, Bujold PM, Schultz W. 2019 Probability Distortion
    Depends on Choice Sequence in Rhesus Monkeys. J. Neurosci. 39,
    2915–2929. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1454-18.2018)

24. Tobler PN, Christopoulos GI, O’Doherty JP, Dolan RJ, Schultz W. 2008
    Neu- ronal Distortions of Reward Probability without Choice. Journal
    of Neuroscience 28, 11703–11711.
    (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2870-08.2008)

25. Wu S-W, Delgado MR, Maloney LT. 2011 The Neural Correlates of
    Subjective Utility of Monetary Outcome and Probability Weight in
    Eco- nomic and in Motor Decision under Risk. J. Neurosci. 31,
    8822–8831. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0540-11.2011)

26. Tversky A, Kahneman D. 1992 Advances in prospect theory: Cu-
    mulative representation of uncertainty. J Risk Uncertainty 5,
    297–323. (doi:10.1007/BF00122574)

27. Riley EP. 2007 Flexibility in Diet and Activity Patterns of Macaca
    tonkeana in Response to Anthropogenic Habitat Alteration. Int J
    Primatol 28, 107–133. (doi:10.1007/s10764-006-9104-6)

14

28. Thierry B, Iwaniuk AN, Pellis SM. 2000 The Inﬂuence of Phylogeny on
the Social Behaviour of Macaques (Primates: Cercopithecidae, genus
Macaca). Ethology 106, 713–728.

29. Thierry B, Bynum EL, Baker S, Kinnaird MF, Matsumura S, Muroyama Y,
    O’Brien TG, Petit O, Watanabe K. 2000 The Social Repertoire of
    Sulawesi Macaques. Primate Research 16, 203–226.
    (doi:10.2354/psj.16.203)

Petit O, Thierry B. 1994 Aggressive and peaceful

interventions Animal Behaviour 48, 1427–1436.

30. in conﬂicts in Tonkean macaques. (doi:10.1006/anbe.1994.1378)

31. Dobson SD. 2012 Coevolution of Facial Expression and Social Tol-
    erance in Macaques. American Journal of Primatology 74, 229–235.
    (doi:10.1002/ajp.21991)

32. Micheletta J, Waller BM. 2012 Friendship aﬀects gaze following in a
    tolerant species of macaque, Macaca nigra. Animal Behaviour 83,
    459–467. (doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2011.11.018)

33. Whitehouse J, Meunier H. 2020 An understanding of third-party
    friendships in a tolerant macaque. Scientiﬁc Reports 10, 9777.
    (doi:10.1038/s41598-020- 66407-w)

34. Joly M, Micheletta J, De Marco A, Langermans JA, Sterck EHM, Waller
    BM. 2017 Comparing physical and social cognitive skills in macaque
    species with diﬀerent degrees of social tolerance. Proceedings of
    the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 284, 20162738.
    (doi:10.1098/rspb.2016.2738)

35. Fizet J, Rimele A, Pebayle T, Cassel J-C, Kelche C, Meunier H. 2017
    An autonomous, automated and mobile device to concurrently assess
    several cognitive functions in group-living non-human primates.
    Neurobiol Learn Mem 145, 45–58. (doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2017.07.013)

36. Pebayle T, Fizet J, Rimele A, Meunier H. 2016 Multitask learning
    machine with dual RFID detection.

37. Kahneman D, Tversky A. 1979 Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
    under Risk. Econometrica 47, 263–291. (doi:10.2307/1914185)

38. Prelec D. 1998 The Probability Weighting Function. Econometrica 66,
    497–527. (doi:10.2307/2998573)

39. Holt CA, Laury SK. 2002 Risk Aversion and Incentive Eﬀects. The
    American Economic Review 92, 1644–1655.

40. Von Neumann J, Morgenstern O. 1944 Theory of games and economic
    behavior. Princeton, NJ, US: Princeton University Press.

41. Sutton RS, Barto AG. 1998 Reinforcement learning: an introduction.
    Cam- bridge, Mass: MIT Press.

15

42. Kraft D. 1988 A Software Package for Sequential Quadratic
Programming. Wiss. Berichtswesen d. DFVLR.

43. Holland JH. 1992 Genetic Algorithms. Sci Am 267, 66–72.
    (doi:10.1038/scientiﬁcamerican0792-66)

44. McGraw KO, Wong SP. 1992 A common language eﬀect size statistic.
    Psychological Bulletin 111, 361–365.
    (doi:10.1037/0033-2909.111.2.361)

45. Ruggeri K et al. 2020 Replicating patterns of prospect theory for
    decision under risk. Nature Human Behaviour , 1–12.
    (doi:10.1038/s41562-020-0886-x)

46. Parker GA, Smith JM. 1990 Optimality theory in evolutionary biology.
    Nature 348, 27–33. (doi:10.1038/348027a0)

47. Darwin C Burrow, John Wyon. 1859 The origin of species by means of
    natural selection or the preservation of favoured races in the
    struggle for life. Harmondsworth; New-York; Ringwood: Penguin books.

48. Harinck F, Van Dijk E, Van Beest I, Mersmann P. 2007 When Gains Loom
    Larger Than Losses: Reversed Loss Aversion for Small Amounts of
    Money. Psychol Sci 18, 1099–1105.
    (doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.02031.x)

49. Lejarraga T, Schulte-Mecklenbeck M, Pachur T, Hertwig R. 2019 The
    attention–aversion gap: how allocation of attention relates to loss
    aversion. Evolu- tion and Human Behavior 40, 457–469.
    (doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2019.05.008)

50. Sheng F, Ramakrishnan A, Seok D, Zhao WJ, Thelaus S, Cen P, Platt
    ML. 2020 Decomposing loss aversion from gaze allocation and pupil
    dilation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 117, 11356–11363.
    (doi:10.1073/pnas.1919670117)

51. Raghuraman AP, Padoa-Schioppa C. 2014 Integration of Multiple
    Determi- nants in the Neuronal Computation of Economic Values.
    Journal of Neuroscience 34, 11583–11603.
    (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1235-14.2014)

52. Sheng CL. 1989 Some quantitative concepts of value and utility from
    a utilitarian point of view. Theor Decis 26, 175–195.
    (doi:10.1007/BF00159225)

53. Yamada H, Tymula A, Louie K, Glimcher PW. 2013 Thirst-dependent risk
    preferences in monkeys identify a primitive form of wealth. PNAS
    110, 15788–15793. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1308718110)

54. Yamada H. 2017 Hunger enhances consistent economic choices in
    non-human primates. Sci Rep 7, 2394.
    (doi:10.1038/s41598-017-02417-5)

55. Druckman JN, McDermott R. 2008 Emotion and the Framing of Risky
    Choice. Polit Behav 30, 297–321. (doi:10.1007/s11109-008-9056-y)

56. Campos-Vazquez RM, Cuilty E. 2014 The role of emotions on risk
    aversion: A Prospect Theory experiment. Journal of Behavioral and
    Experimental Economics 50, 1–9. (doi:10.1016/j.socec.2014.01.001)

16

Data availability

The data necessary to reproduce the analyses presented in this article
are provided at https://github.com/aureliennioche/EvoProspect.

Code availability

The code necessary to reproduce the simulations and the analyses
presented in this article is provided at
https://github.com/aureliennioche/EvoProspect.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Silabe and the University of Strasbourg for expert
animal care of the Tonkean colony and ﬁnancial support. We thank Hélène
Meunier for the initial training of the Tonkean colony on a touchscreen
interface and Adam Rimele for technical support and data management. The
rhesus macaques were housed in the centre Paul Broca Nouvelle Aquitaine,
thanks to Labex BRAIN ﬁnancial support. Hugues Orignac and Tho-Hai
N’Guyen take care of them with great skills. TB and MD are supported by
the CNRS, SB by the University of Strasbourg, SBG by the University of
Panthéon-Assas, NR by Inria and AN by the Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR-16-CE38-0003), the Ministère de la Recherche et de la
Technologie (French ministry for research and technology), Sorbonne
Université and Aalto University. The funders had no role in study
design, data collection, and interpretation, or the decision to submit
the work for publication.

Author Contributions

AN, MD, SB performed the experiments in monkeys; AN, NR performed the
simulations; AN, NR and SB performed the data analysis; AN, NR, MD, SBG,
SB, and TB designed the study and co-wrote the manuscript.

Competing Interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

17

Figure 1: (a,b) Four MALTs were set up in a shelter placed inside the
macaques’ wooded park and behavioural tasks similar to the ones used in
Nioche et al. [17] were presented via a touchscreen interface. Correct
trials are rewarded with diluted syrups according to the probability
associated with the choice. (c) Screenshot from the control video
streaming while a subject was performing a trial. The pattern of each
slice represents the number of tokens earned or lost (see Methods). (d)
Experimental device for rhesus monkeys at the IMN. The monkey sat in a
primate restraint chair positioned 20 cm from a touchscreen installed in
an electrically isolated dark room. A resting bar was mounted on the
lower part of the chair at waist level. A tube positioned directly in
front of the monkey’s mouth dispensed small amounts of apple sauce as a
reward. Task/video monitoring and data acquisition were performed by a
separate computer located outside the dark room.

18

abcDark roomApple
sauceCameraComputerTouchscreenRestingbarRestraintchairdFigure 2: (a)
The orientation of the parallel lines constituting the pattern indicates
a quantity (horizontal lines represent 0; clockwise rotation of one-,
two-, three-quarters of 90° represent respectively a loss of -1, -2, -3
tokens; counter- clockwise rotation of one-, two-, three-quarters of 90°
represent respectively a gain of 1, 2, 3 tokens). (b,c) Each lottery is
represented by a pie chart, as in Stauﬀer et al. [22]. Each pie chart
can be composed of two slices. Each slice encodes one possible outcome
of the lottery (x or 0). The arc length of each slice represents the
probability of the corresponding outcome (p or 1 − p). The relative
positions on the pie chart of each slice are randomly determined at each
trial. Panel b and c represents the task as it was coded at the
University Strasbourg and the IMN of Bordeaux, respectively.

19

-3-2-10+2+1+3acbTimeCue contact=trial onsetStart cueLotteries onsetCue
contact=chosen optionOutcome
onsetRewarddelivery……………………TimeRewarddeliveryBar return=outcome onsetCue
contact=chosen optionLotteries onsetBar grasping=trialonsetFigure 3:
Consideration of the diﬀerence between expected values when
probabilities are equal but amounts diﬀer, when amounts are equal but
probability diﬀer, or when there is a trade-oﬀ between quan- tity and
probability. (a,d) Probability of choosing the right option against the
diﬀerence of EV when probabilities are equal but amounts diﬀer. (b,e)
Prob- ability of choosing the right option against the diﬀerence of EV
when amounts are equal but probability diﬀer. (c,f ) Probability of
choosing the riskiest option against the diﬀerence of EV when there is a
trading-oﬀ between quantity and probability. In all panels, blue lines
are related to choices involving gains, and orange lines to choices
involving losses. Thin lines represent the value of ordinary two
parameters sigmoid functions using the best-ﬁt parameter values of each
individual (one line corresponds to one individual). Thick lines
represent the average value of these functions.

20

21012EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose right)aSame
probabilities(gain)21012EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose right)bSame
amounts(gain)1.00.50.00.51.0EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose
riskiest)cQuantity-prob.
tradeoff(gain)21012EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose right)dSame
probabilities(loss)21012EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose right)eSame
amounts(loss)1.00.50.00.51.0EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose
riskiest)fQuantity-prob. tradeoff(loss)Figure 4: Modelling of monkeys’
attitude toward risk. (a,d) Monkeys’ utility function, (b,e) monkeys’
probability weighting function, (c,f ) monkeys’ probability to choose
the right lottery according to the diﬀerence of Subjective Expected
Utility (SEU) between right and left lotteries. In all panels, blue
lines are related to choices involving gains, and orange lines to
choices involving losses. Thin lines represent the indicated function
using the average best-ﬁt parameter values over the data chunks of one
individual, and thick lines represent the indicated function using the
mean of the average best-ﬁt parameter values over all the individuals.
The mean value ± STD) for each parameter for each condition is indicated
in the left corner.

21

01x01u(x)=0.37±0.29aUtility
function(gain)0.00.51.0p0.00.51.0w(p)=0.86±0.24bProbability weighting
function(gain)1.00.50.00.51.0SEU(Lright)SEU(Lleft)0.00.51.0P(ChooseLright)=0.17±0.05=0.11±0.18cSoftmax
function(gain)10x10u(x)=0.49±0.21dUtility
function(loss)0.00.51.0p0.00.51.0w(p)=0.72±0.20eProbability weighting
function(loss)1.00.50.00.51.0SEU(Lright)SEU(Lleft)0.00.51.0P(ChooseLright)=0.19±0.06=0.07±0.12fSoftmax
function(loss)Figure 5: Simulation of 1000 agents playing 100 lotteries
and over 1000 generations. (a,c) Probability weighting function. (b,d)
Utility function. The initial population is generated using parameters
(αk, βk) randomly and uniformly drawn from [αmin, αmax] × [βmin, βmax].
The apparent asymmetry of initial curves comes from the non-linearity of
parameter eﬀects on function shapes. After 1000 epochs where we applied
the selection of the best agents, generated new agents from their
parameters and introduced a few random variations, the ﬁnal mean
behaviour of agents is shown using a thick black curve.

22

0.00.20.40.60.81.0p0.00.20.40.60.81.0w(p)aProbability weighting
functionInitial
population0.00.20.40.60.81.0x0.00.20.40.60.81.0u(x)bUtility
functionInitial
population0.00.20.40.60.81.0p0.00.20.40.60.81.0w(p)cProbability
weighting functionFinal
population0.00.20.40.60.81.0x0.00.20.40.60.81.0u(x)dUtility
functionFinal populationFigure 6: Analysis of the mean gain of a
population of agents. Each point on the left panel corresponds to the
mean gain of a subset (20% on the ﬁgure) of a group of NA agents playing
NT lotteries. Depending on their probability weighting and utility
functions, the mean gain of best individuals might be better than the
expected value. The white line corresponds to the separation along with
the median score (1.23) of all simulations. On the right, we display the
utility function (blue) and the probability weighting function (red) for
a few representative points (a-i).

23

0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6 (probability weighting function,
red)0.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.60.8 (utility function, blue)abcdefghiMean
gain of the luckiest individuals1.21.31.41.51.6risk averserisk
seekinglow ++ / high –low – / high ++abcdefghiFigure 7: Parameter
sensitivity. The exact shape of the ﬁnal population’s functions is
dependent on the selection rate, mutation rate and selection rate.
However, for a selection rate below 35%, the general pattern remains the
same: risk-seeking (convexity of the utility function) and
overestimation of the small probabilities and underestimation of the
high probabilities (inverted S-shaped probability weighting function).

24

0.70.80.91.01.11.20.30.20.10.00.10.050.100.150.200.250.300.350.400.450.500.550.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.950.010.020.030.040.050.100.200.500.050.100.150.200.250.300.350.400.45Detail
of left panel0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6 (probability weighting
function)0.60.40.20.00.20.40.6 (utility function)risk averserisk
seekinglow ++ / high –low – / high ++Parameter sensitivity as mean of
final populationselection ratemutation ratemixture rateFigure 8:
Comparison of monkeys’ and agents’ behaviour. (a) Using the result from
the monkey’s data ﬁtting, we can represent the population for gain
(blue) and loss (red) showing that the monkeys display a tendency to
overestimate small probabilities and underestimate large probabilities
(both in gain and loss domain) and that they are risk-averse in the gain
domain but risk-seeking in the loss domain. Subjects ‘Hav’ and ‘Gla’ are
rhesus monkeys. (b) Initial population and ﬁnal population of agents.
The mean behaviour (black cross) is closer to monkeys’ mean behaviour in
the loss domain (red cross) compared to monkey’s mean behaviour in the
gain domain (blue cross). It is to be noted that the exact ﬁnal position
depends on the selection, mutation, and mixture rate (see Figure 5).

25

0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6 (probability weighting
function)0.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.60.8 (utility function)risk averserisk
seekinglow ++ / high –low – / high
++AbrAlaBarCesGlaHavNemPacYohAbrAlaBarCesGlaHavNemPacYohaMonkeys fitted
behaviourgainloss0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6 (probability weighting
function)risk averserisk seekinglow ++ / high –low – / high ++bAgents’
behaviourinitialfinalparameter name

number of lotteries NL number of agents NA number of epochs NE number of
trials NT wα uβ αmin, αmax βmin, βmax γ (selection rate) δ (mutation
rate) (cid:15) (mixture rate) PRNG seed used for all displayed results

value

1000 1000 1000 100 x → e−(−lnp)α x → e1−β 0.25, 1.75 −0.80, +0.80 0.20
0.02 0.25 123

Table 1: Parameters used in all simulations unless stated otherwise.

26


