Neural coding of variable song structure in the songbird Xavier Hinaut,
Aurore Cazala, Catherine del Negro

To cite this version:

Xavier Hinaut, Aurore Cazala, Catherine del Negro. Neural coding of
variable song structure in the songbird. EBM 2017 - European Birdsong
Meeting, May 2017, Bordeaux, France. pp.1. ￿hal-01665824￿

HAL Id: hal-01665824

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01665824

Submitted on 17 Dec 2017

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Neural coding of variable song structure in the songbird Xavier
Hinaut1234, Aurore Cazala1, Catherine Del Negro1 1 Université Paris
Saclay, UMR 9197, Neuro-PSI, Orsay, France. 2 Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest,
Talence, France. 3 LaBRI, UMR 5800, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, Université de
Bordeaux, Talence, France. 4 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives,
UMR 5293, CNRS, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Introduction

Songs and song-evoked responses of a single unit (bird S62)

Songbirds are an excellent model for exploring the neural coding of
variable sequences of categorical acoustic elements. The domesticated
canary, for instance, produce higly variable songs with complex
transition rules between two consecutive acoustic elements. These
transition rules are non-Markovian (i.e. the next acoustic element to be
sung is dependent on several previous elements, not only the last one)
[1]. In the HVC of Bengalese finches, Bouchard and Brainard [5] found
that variations in responses to a given syllable could be explained by a
positive linear dependence on the convergence probability of preceding
sequences. Here, we reanalyse data from [3] to see if similar findings
could be found for canaries.

BOS transition rules (divergence)

Chunk

Chunk

1

2

3

4

END

5

6

7

8

END

9

10

11

Amplitude

BOS (Bird Own Song)

Goal

Our aim is to understand how complex song sequences produced by canaries
are coded in a sensorimotor area, the HVC nucleus.

Frequency (Hz)

Motor pathway

Learning pathway

HVC

RA

DLM

DM

nXIIts

LMAN

Area X

The HVC (somehow analogous to vocal premotor cortical areas)
participates in generating temporal organization of acoustic elements
within songs [2]. In the HVC of canaries, most of cells show auditory
responses and are selective for the bird’s own song (BOS) over its
temporal variants (with a different order of acoustic elements) [3], but
how the sequential structure (ordering of acoustic elements) is coded is
poorly understood.

HYPOTHESIS HVC neurons encode all or a subset of syntax features of the
songs heard.

Song structure and ways to explore it

D(xy) = 0.5

X

Y

B

N

C(xy) = 1.0

X

Y

B

N

A

C

A

C

M

O

M

O

Divergence Probability

Convergence Probability

X

Y

M

N

O

Y

X

A

B

C

D(xy) = P(Y|X)

C(xy) = P(X|Y)

given ‘X’ what is the probability that ‘Y’ follows?

given ‘Y’ what is the probability that ‘X’ precedes?

Each canary has a specific repertoire composed of 15-35 distincs
syllables (acoustic elements organized into sequences). According to
[1], sequences of acoustic elements in canary songs show long-distance
dependencies (e.g. “chunks”).

No correlation found btw responses and prob. div./conv.

Z-score vs. Probability We found no correlation between phrases neuronal
responses (firing rate or Z-score) for the BOS or the randomized song
and their probability of divergence and convergence. Below: the Z-score
for 5 units of one bird (S62) given probability of divergence (left) and
convergence (right).

e r o c s - Z

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Divergence Probability (order 1)

e r o c s - Z

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

References

[1] Markovitz et al., PLoS Comp. Bio. (2013). [2] Hahnloser et al.,
Nature (2002). [3] Lehongre & Del Negro, Neurosci. (2011). [4] Fujimoto
et al., J. Neuro (2011). [5] Bouchard & Brainard, J. Neuro. (2013).

0.2

0.0 1.0 Convergence Probability (order 1)

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.5

0

−0.5

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

2

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Syllable

8

9

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Phrase

6

8

Raster

Phrase id

Time (sec)

PSTH

Phrase id

Time (sec)

Time (sec)

BOS

Z-Score P. Divergence (order 1) P. Convergence (order 1)

1.0

0.5

0.0

1

2 3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11

Randomized song

Probabilities of divergence and convergence are “flat” (equal to zero
for all song), but Z- score is not “flat”.

e d u

t i l

p m A

) z H

(

y c n e u q e r F

0.5

0

−0.5

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

Randomized song

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1

2

8

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

6 Raster

2 Phrase id

PSTH

Phrase id

Current work: studying responses to chunk modifications

In a new study, we recorded auditory responses in HVC of anesthetized
canaries using multi-electrods arrays (8 or 16). We used as auditory
stimuli the bird’s own song (BOS) and modified versions of the BOS, in
which we manipulated either the local or global structure. We reversed
the position of two consecutive elements (local) or reordered parts of
the song (global).

Original song (BOS 1)

A B C D E F G H I J

#1

#2

#3

Local modification

Global modification

A C B D E F G H I J

A B C E D F G H I J

A B C D E F G I H J

A D E F G H I B C J

X

X

A F G H I B C D E J

Similar song (BOS 2)

A B C B C D E F G M

Acknowledgments The work was supported by Project IDEX NeuroSaclay “From
Sequence Learning to Language Acquisition”. We would from http://
quantum.opticsolomouc.org/archives/1026 under Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.

for his help and advises. Poster

thank Nicolas Giret

template

inspired

like

to

Contacts xavier.hinaut@inria.fr, {aurore.cazala;
catherine.del-negro}@u-psud.fr


