The role of cognitive processes in creative problem solving: a
computational approach Frédéric Alexandre, Chloé Mercier, Axel Palaude,
Margarida Romero, Thierry

Viéville

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Chloé Mercier, Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero,
Thierry Viéville. The role of cognitive processes in creative problem
solving: a computational approach. 7th annual meeting of the Society for
the Neuroscience of Creativity (SfNC 2022), May 2022, Virtual, United
States. ￿hal-03659409￿

HAL Id: hal-03659409

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03659409

Submitted on 5 May 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

The role of cognitive processes in creative problem solving: a
computational approach.

Frédéric Alexandre1, Chloé Mercier1, Axel Palaude1, Margarida Romero2,
Thierry Viéville1,2 1. Inria, Mnemosyne Team, Bordeaux, France 2. LINE,
Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France.

Context: a multi-disciplinary perspective on ill-defined learning
activities

Creativity, a phenomenon whereby something new and valuable is formed by
a subject in a given context, plays a critical role in specific phases
of learning activities. Here, we aim at analyzing creativity in the
precise context of ill-defined problem-solving tasks, as it can be
experienced during learning activities.

This study aims to contribute to a better understanding of creativity
within ill-defined creative problem-solving (CPS) tasks, including
complex problem solving, through a multi-disciplinary approach using
computational and neuro-cognitive formalisms. This approach allows us to
propose a multi-factor theoretical description of such cognitive human
activities. Based on this, we aim to operationalize a computational
framework of creative processes during CPS learning tasks. We focus on
an ill-defined CPS task performed by a unique learner, while even in
this case sociocultural perspectives have to be considered to model
prior knowledge and situational awareness aspects..

Problem solving as a trajectory generation

Problem Space

Problem

A problem space consists of: ● a set of symbolic structures (the states
of

the space)

● a set of operators over the space.

A problem in a problem space consists of: • a set of initial states • a
set of goal states • a set of path constraints.

The problem is to find a path through the space that starts at any
initial state, passes only along paths that satisfy the path
constraints, and ends at any goal state.

Neural basis of creative problem solving

2.  Affiliation

A computational framework for knowledge representation

CONTROL NETWORK Attention and cognitive control (PFC)

DEFAULT MODE NETWORK Spontaneous, mind wandering (IC, HPC)

evaluate appropriateness (convergent)

propose candidate ideas (divergent)

SALIENCE NETWORK Salience of sensory features (IC, ACC-PFC)

A general view of the broad functional organization discussed here, from
(O’Reilly, 2010) adapted to our purpose. The What stimulus-driven (S)
semantic representation (S’) corresponds to the ventral posterior
pathway, while the How stimulus (S) to response (R) mapping, i.e. 
perception to action, corresponds to the dorsal posterior pathway. In
the anterior part of the brain, the prefrontal cortex (PFC) organization
is multidimensional as detailed in (Alexandre, 2021), with a What - Why
- Where - How goal-directed organization, a What concrete-abstract
gradient regarding representation abstraction and a How
concrete-abstract gradient regarding rule complexity. A step further,
the lateral-medial axis corresponds to cold cognitive calculation versus
hot emotional value representation.

3 main neural networks involved in creative processes:

-   
-   
-   

the Default network corresponds to brain regions active during
spontaneous thought and mind wandering. It includes the insular cortex
(IC) and the hippocampus (HPC) and a primary function of this network is
episodic memory retrieval. the Control network includes the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) and is activated for the control of attention. the Salience
network includes the insular cortex (IC), the prefrontal cortex (PFC)
and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and monitors the salience of
sensory features.

(Beaty et al., 2016) has reported a major association between the
default and control networks during creativity, where the default
network proposes candidate ideas (divergent phase) and the control
network stands for the evaluation of their appropriateness (convergent
phase).

Figure adapted from (Lesage, 2016).

Symbolic concepts anchored on sensorimotor features…

A symbolic knowledge graph providing multiple layers of abstraction as
well as anchoring into sensorimotor feature spaces, inspired by
(McClelland, 2003), (Gärdenfors, 2004), (Wiggins, 2006), (Hommel, 2015)
and (Olteteanu, 2020) among others.

The key point is that such concepts can also be considered as points in
an abstract state space.

A concept may inherit features from another concept (in dotted lines,
e.g., the Penguin “is-a” Bird thus inherits the features of a Bird) but
also override some of them (in red lines, e.g., a Penguin can also swim
but can not fly).

… allowing to define behavioral rules at a meta-level

Formalizing problem solving as a trajectory generation problem in an
abstract state space. Here, the definition is extended to complex
ill-defined problem solving and allows us to propose an operational
specification of creativity in this context.

Creative problem solving, step by step

well-defined problems

Tower of Hanoï

1

2

3

General schema of creative problem-solving steps, adapted to our
approach, from the componential model proposed by (Amabile 1996). The
central part corresponds to the creative process itself.

The notion of behavioral rule in order to formalize an action in a
problem-solving task. A precondition is to be satisfied for the rule to
be applicable. The precondition is defined as a region of the state
space, the current state space estimation as another region and the rule
is applicable if the latter is included in the former. The result of the
action corresponds to a postcondition, defined as a region of the state
space, and the next state space is included in this region.

References

Alexandre, F. (2020). Creativity explained by Computational Cognitive
Neuroscience. ICCC’20 - International Conference on Computational
Creativity. Alexandre, F. (2021). A global framework for a systemic view
of brain modeling. Brain Informatics. Amabile, T. (1983). The Social
Psychology of Creativity. Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., &
Schacter, D. L. (2016). Creative Cognition and Brain Network Dynamics.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences. Dietrich, A. (2004). The cognitive
neuroscience of creativity. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. Newell, A.,
Simon H. (1972). Human Problem Solving. Oltețeanu, A.-M. (2020).
Cognition and the Creative Machine: Cognitive AI for Creative Problem
Solving. O’Reilly, R. C. (2010). The What and How of Prefrontal Cortical
Organization. Trends in Neurosciences. Romero, M., David, D., & Lille,
B. (2019). CreaCube, a Playful Activity with Modular Robotics. In Games
and Learning Alliance. Wiggins, G. A. (2006). Searching for
computational creativity. New Generation Computing.

ill-defined problems

ambiguity level

initial state

CreaCube

initial state

goal state

“Build a vehicle composed of 4 items, moving autonomously from the black
point to the red point”

?

goal state

We hypothesize that solving such ill-defined problems requires
creativity, in a sense of the competency to generate, select and
implement ideas that are both i) novel (i.e., original, unexpected) and
ii) appropriate (i.e., useful, adequate regarding task constraints),
from the problem posing disambiguation to the problem solving enaction
within a specific task and sociocultural context.

1

2

3

The preparation phase requires an interaction between the environment
and the learner in creative ill-defined complex problem solving. We
formalize this interaction in terms of bottom-up conceptualization,
i.e., building an internal representation of the external situation to
raise the problem issue, and top-down instantiation of the problem,
i.e., setting a goal for the next step.

A geometric illustration of two idea generation mechanisms, allowed by
the previous symbolic knowledge representation. Left: Exploratory search
in the sense of (Ritchie, 2012; G. A. Wiggins, 2006). Right: Reasoning
by analogy.

The distance between the current state and the goal state can be
estimated using an edit distance between two semi-ordered hierarchical
tuples (geodesic structure).

3


