Interaction between the limbic and sensori-motor
cortico-basal loops : a systemic framework to explain
animal behaviour
Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Frédéric Alexandre. Interaction between the limbic and sensori-motor cortico-
basal loops : a systemic framework to explain animal behaviour. SBDM 2018 - Eighth International
Symposium on Biology of Decision Making, May 2018, Paris, France. ￿hal-01820371￿

HAL Id: hal-01820371

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01820371

Submitted on 21 Jun 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Bhargav Teja NALLAPU1,2,3, Frédéric ALEXANDRE1,2,3

1INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200 Avenue de la Vieille Tour, 33405 Talence, France
2LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, Talence, France
3IMN, Université de Bordeaux, CNRS, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France

We propose an integrated framework of interaction between cortico-basal 
loops, described as the projection of specific regions of sensory and frontal 
cortex, experimentally observed to be involved in the generic functioning of 
decision making and action selection of a primate [Alexander et al., 1986]. These 
loops, acquiring stimulus information and possible actions, project towards 
respective regions of the striatum and connect back to the initial frontal areas to 
trigger the selected action. We implement a framework of such cortico-basal 
loops, adapting a well established neuronal model proposed in [Hazy et al., 
2006], as a set of two limbic loops and two sensori-motor loops. Two limbic 
loops include (i) a preferential loop through the Orbito Frontal Cortex (OFC, 
widely understood to represent states of the environment and their learned 
preference value) and (ii) a motivation-guided loop through the Anterior 
Cingulate Cortex (ACC), influencing the decision with the agent’s internal needs 
and motivation.

Two sensori-motor loops consist of (i) an orientation loop through the Parietal 
Cortex to orient towards the chosen stimulus and (ii) a motor loop through the 
supplementary motor area to evoke an action to reach the stimulus that is 
oriented towards. We study the dynamics of hierarchy and competition among 
these cortico- basal loops, with stronger emphasis on the role of internal 
(goal-driven behavior) and the external stimuli 
emotional characteristics 
characteristics (stimulus driven behavior) in the decision. We take into account 
the distributed consensus among the loops depending on the dynamic situation 
[Pezzulo and Cisek, 2016], role of neuromodulation and learning across these 
loops and the role of external world. For experimentation, We demonstrate how 
a virtual agent, considering a survival task, can interact with an unknown and 
dynamic external environment. We use Malmo ([Johnson et al., 2016]), a 
platform on the top of Minecraft (the well-known immersive world game) to 
evaluate the framework and explore realistic scenarios that mimic survival tasks.

Framework of generic cortico-basal loops

Frontal cortex
Sensory cortex

- Basal Ganglia

What?

Preference

Limbic loops

Why? 

Need

Orbito Frontal Cortex (OFC), Anterior Cingulate Cortex 

(ACC)

Sensori-motor loops

Where? 

Orientation

How?

Location

Frontal Eye Fields (FEF),

Motor Cortex (MC)

blocks

position 

apple, cake, water 

context
orientation

World

MALMO

World - 
Agent - 
Items - 
Actions - 
State - 

Adaptations : Embodiment of the agent
Needs and preferences - 
Visibility - 

Reach, See, Appear 

Figure

exploration
decision
orienting

approach

Versatile Behavior

With the above mentioned model and software environment, our aim is to demonstrate multiple animal 

behaviors using the same framework, with different internal and external states resulting in different behaviors.

Stimulus-driven : While exploring the environment, multiple stimuli can be perceived by the agent. The 

relevance of the stimuli to the agent’s internal variables contributes to the agent’s motivation in accessing it.

Goal-directed : With the constant monitoring of internal needs, from previous learning, the agent selects the 

stimuli that are relevant, as current goals and starts exploring in the environment.

Opportunistic : In a typical goal-directed behavior, when the agent encounters stmuli that are not relevant to 

the current need, but perceived to be rewarding for a possible future need, the agent should be able to put the 

initial goal on hold, opportunistically exploit the current situation, and then proceed with the ongoing goal.

REFERENCES

[Alexander et al., 1986] Alexander, G., DeLong, M., and Strick, P. (1986). Parallel organization of functionally segregated circuits linking basal 

ganglia and cortex. Ann. Rev. Neurosci., 9:357–381.

[Hazy et al., 2006] Hazy, T. E., Frank, M. J., and O’Reilly, R. C. (2006). Banishing the homunculus: making working memory work. 

Neuroscience, 139(1):105–118.

[Johnson et al., 2016] Johnson, M., Hofmann, K., Hutton, T., and Bignell, D. (2016). The malmo platform for artificial intelligence 

experimentation. In IJCAI, pages 4246–4247.

[Pezzulo and Cisek, 2016] Pezzulo, G. and Cisek, P. (2016). Navigating the affordance landscape: feedback control as a process model of 

behavior and cognition. Trends in cognitive sciences, 20(6):414–424.

Learning

Acknowledgements

GIven the diverse role of ventral striatum (VS) across the loops, we plan to integrated dopamine modulated 

learning within each loop as well as across the loops to modulate each other.

We thank Thierry VIEVILLE in the team MNEMOSYNE, INRIA Bordeaux, for constant guidance and feedback in this work. 

8
1
0
2

,

y
a
M
–
e
c
n
a
r
F

,

s
i
r
a
P

,

i

g
n
k
a
M
n
o
i
s
i
c
e
D
f
o
y
g
o
l
o
B
n
o
m
u
i
s
o
p
m
y
S
l

i

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n

I

h
t
h
g
E

i

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
