Computational thinking development and assessment through tabletop
escape games Divya Menon, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Divya Menon, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville. Computational thinking
development and International Journal of Serious Games, 2019, 6,
assessment through tabletop escape games. ￿10.17083/ijsg.v6i4.319￿.
￿hal-02909661￿

HAL Id: hal-02909661

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02909661

Submitted on 3 Aug 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Computational thinking development and assessment through tabletop
escape games Divya Menon1,2, Margarida Romero2, Thierry Viéville1,2
Inria, Mnemosyne Research Team and Science Outreach
divya.menon@etu.univ- cotedazur.fr, thierry.vieville@inria.fr 2Learning,
INnovation and Education, Université Côte d’Azur
margarida.romero@unice.fr

1

Abstract

The development and assessment of computational thinking (CT) is
garnering a lot of attention and research since the last decade.
However, CT learning is perceived as a time-consuming and frustrating
experience by many K-12 and university students. Hence, educators are
coming up with various methodologies to make CT both accessible and
engaging for learners, thus leading to a spurt in various game-based
learning (GBL) approaches in this field, ranging from board games to
educational robotic games. This paper strives to evaluate tabletop
escape games as a potential tool to develop CT as a competency among
K-12 learners and the assessment of its effectiveness in achieving the
learning outcomes. To do this, the authors conducted a literature review
of existing papers on tabletop games that use the theme of an escape
game to develop and assess CT as a competency. Based on a systematic
analysis of the existing literature, they conducted an analytical review
of three papers on tabletop games in CT to identify the CT components
being developed, the evaluation methods explained in them, the current
limitations faced by the authors of these three papers and the possible
ways to circumvent such limitations. This paper also covers the design
aspects to be considered for the development of a CT-based educational
escape game to support and evaluate this competency and its components.

Keywords: Game-Based Learning, Escape Game, Board Game, Tabletop Game,
Computational Thinking, Competency Assessment

1 Introduction

Since the last decade, computational thinking (CT) is being increasingly
identified as an important competency for learners of all ages, not just
by educators but also by researchers and policymakers [1] [2]. Most of
our everyday activities rely on digital technologies for efficient
functioning; hence future professionals need to develop CT competency
for their personal and professional activities. A growing corpus of
research is being developed to define learning activities aimed at
supporting its development and assessment [1] [3] [4]. From the present
review of literature on CT, there appears to be no debate on the
importance of integrating it with K-12 education and its relevance not
just in the world of computer science but in our everyday lives. It can
help improve the current test-driven educational model by transforming
it into a competency-based educational model.

Though there appear to be a variety of definitions available among
current literature on CT when applied to the context of K-12 education,
there is a growing consensus on the CT definition provided by Cuny,
Snyder, and Wing [5], who define it as “the thought processes involved
in formulating problems and their solutions so that the solutions are
represented in a form that can be effectively carried out by an
information-processing agent” (p.1). The ISTE repository [6] elaborates
on this further by defining CT as a problem-solving process that
includes identifying the problem, selecting appropriate tools to solve
the problem (computers or other tools), organising and analysing
collected data logically, representing identifying and experimenting
with possible solutions and finding ways to automate them (through
algorithmic thinking) for maximum efficiency and applying this knowledge
to a variety of other problems. But when viewed as a competency to be
developed, Shute, Sun and Asbell-Clarke [7] explain that “computational
thinking skills include managing information effectively and efficiently
with technologies in our data-driven era” (p.1).

this data using models or simulations,

Grover and Pea [8] suggest that CT is a competency that needs to be
developed

among all learners. They cite Wing et al. [9] and explain that “CT being
viewed as at the core of all STEM disciplines, it appears that computing
in K-12 is an idea whose time has come” (p.2). As a competency, CT is
not just about learning to code using block and text- based programming.
Students need to be empowered with the necessary competencies to resolve
problems by thinking critically and creatively. Resnick [10] explains
that their “educational mission is to engage students in thinking
creatively, to encourage systematic thinking and working collaboratively
- essential skills for everyone in today’s society” (para 5).
Hershkovitz et al. [11] expand on this further by proposing that
providing learners with programming environments where they can use
their creativity could help in fostering their overall learning as well.
In this context, CT is being recognised as one of the most suitable
competencies to be developed because it encompasses problem-solving,
critical thinking and logical thinking. Hence, its advantages are not
restricted to only those who wish to pursue a career related to
information technology.

An uninitiated learner may find CT a complex competency to acquire,
either because of a lack of motivation or due to ineffective learning
strategies [18] [19] [20]. Despite its acknowledged importance to the
present and future generations, this identification of a lack of
interest among learners might be one of the reasons that has prompted
various studies into efficient learning methods to develop CT
competency. While there are three approaches to develop the CT
competency, namely computer programming [10], educational robotics [13]
and unplugged activities [12], educators and researchers are considering
the use of different game-based learning (GBL) activities within these
approaches to engage learners with CT. GBL refers to a learning approach
in which gameplay is designed around definitive learning outcomes and
ensures the integration of game mechanics with experiential learning. In
certain contexts, GBL can support the development of competencies and
learning objectives [21]. Currently, escape games are gaining popularity
as a GBL and gamification tool due to their immersive and engaging
nature. Hence, in this paper, the authors strived to evaluate the
effectiveness of the tabletop version of escape games as a potential GBL
activity to develop and assess CT as a competency.

1.1 Research questions addressed within this paper

In this paper, the authors conducted a literature review of existing
papers (in English) on tabletop escape games that were used as a medium
to develop and assess CT as a competency. The purpose of this paper is
to address the following research questions:

● Currently, are there any papers on tabletop games based on the theme
of an

escape game that study the development and assessment of CT?

● What CT components do these tabletop escape games cover? ● What
methods do the authors of these papers use to assess the development of
CT

among K-12 and university students?

● Are there features of tabletop escape games that could make them a
potential

method to develop and assess CT as a competency?

● Are there any limitations to using tabletop escape games as a learning
approach

towards CT? If so, how can they be circumvented?

Before evaluating the potential of tabletop escape games to develop and
assess CT

competency, it is crucial to first understand its components and their
definitions, which will be discussed in the next section.

1.2 Common CT components and their definitions

Today, CT is not restricted to the knowledge of or related to computers
but includes some pertinent cognitive abilities that can be imparted
through computational topics. This includes not only computer
programming itself but as pointed out in the referred definitions of CT
[5] [7], information coding and decoding, formal language (with respect
to human language) understanding and mechanical processes (for example,
parallel versus sequential processes and process complexity). The
available literature on CT competency offers diverse opinions on what
components constitute this broad subject. Brennan and Resnick [17]
propose a three-dimensional CT framework comprising computational
concepts (such as sequences, parallelism, conditionals, etc.);
computational practices (such as debugging, reusing or sharing code,
etc.); and computational perspectives (such as questioning or
collaborating). According to Wing [12], CT covers five core aspects,
including conditional logic, distributed processing, debugging,
simulation and algorithm building. Denning [13] elaborates on this by
referring to the computer as a tool rather than the object of study in
computation and computation as an ever-changing way of representing
information. He classifies the principles of computer science into
computing, coordination, communication, recollection, automation, design
and evaluation. When Papert [14] used the term ‘computational thinking’
in Mindstorms, he also referred to computers as “objects-to-think-with”
that can be used in K-12 education (p.182) as an alternative to
traditional learning environments, because they can engage learners,
regardless of age, owing to their “universality” (p.8).

Based on Wing’s definition of CT [12] and Papert’s [14] materiality of
“objects-to- think-with”, Romero, Lepage and Lille [13] developed a
six-component CT framework (CT6) including the identification of the
problem (COMPO1 for component 1), organisation and modeling of the
problem (COMPO2), formal systems (COMPO31) to refer to code, physical
systems (COMPO4) to refer to the hardware and other tangible connected
objects, devising a solution (COMPO5) and solution evaluation and
iterative improvement (COMPO6).

1 COMPO3 was initially named “code literacy” before being renamed as
“formal systems”; COMPO4 was initially named “technology literacy”
before being renamed as “physical systems” after a focus group on CT
[19].

Figure 1: Computational thinking components of the CT6 framework [15]
The table below lists the CT components and subcomponents assessed under
CT competency and their definitions, used as the coding schema for the
analysis of tabletop escape games for CT in this paper.

Table 1: List of CT subcomponents in CT6 framework

The next section will introduce opportunities in GBL to support the
development of

different CT components and subcomponents.

2 Educational escape games to develop CT

Escape games originated as games played within a locked room where
players work in teams to strategize their escape by solving puzzles and
overcoming challenges to discover hidden keys. In recent years, they
have gained tremendous popularity as a game-based and gamification tool
that can be used to promote learning of any chosen subject for diverse
groups of learners. Nicholson [16] defines escape games as “live-action
team- based games where players discover clues, solve puzzles and
accomplish tasks in one or more rooms in order to accomplish a specific
goal (usually escaping from a room) in a limited time’’ (p.1). Today,
educational escape games can be played in a classroom, online, through
board games, or even from a box.

Escape games are based on a problem-solving narrative in which players
are unaware of the expected outcomes. To play, they need to understand
the problem and identify and implement a solution. Achieving the
objectives of the escape game requires players to think creatively and
work within their teams. Moreover, escape games could offer educators
the flexibility to integrate any chosen subject with the theme of the
game, which makes them suitable to accomplish any learning objectives,
including those requiring a certain complexity such as in CT
development. Educational escape games could be a potential medium to aid
in developing and assessing CT components because they leverage the
features of serious games to immerse learners in a narrative-based
problem- solving scenario.

Educational escape games have the potential to be adapted to different
disciplines in different learning environments. As a game that requires
players to be actively involved in the problem-solving process, escape
games could prove to be suitable for CT development and assessment. As
with any competency, CT can also be effectively imbibed when learners
practice the knowledge they gain. In escape games, learners are engaged
to apply the knowledge they gain to complete challenges or tasks,
thereby learning by doing [17]. They could offer learners the
opportunity to experience, reflect on and apply the learning they gain
during the course of a game [18]. Apart from being actively involved,
learners should receive timely feedback on their progress and get ample
opportunities for trial and error before they succeed in achieving the
learning objectives without fear of failure [19]. This aspect makes
escape games suitable, because irrespective of the medium in which
learners play it, they apply their learning to accomplish tasks and
hence, receive feedback in terms of visual representations or debriefing
at the end of each task. Moreover, topics like CT may have a better
chance of development among learners if a scaffolding approach is used.
These games require learners to use their existing knowledge to complete
challenges, thereby acquiring new knowledge along the way. Escape games
usually have levels of progression which can be used by educators to
initially introduce learners to foundational CT concepts. Gradually, as
they progress to higher levels, learners can be provided with
opportunities to gain advanced knowledge and apply it either during
gameplay or through game creation.

Escape games are a specific subtype of cooperative games wherein players
“work

together to win or lose as a team” [20, p.2]. These games are based on
positive interdependence [21], but they have specific features, such as
the operationalisation through a narrative of space-time in which the
character should escape a certain threat. The engagement of learners
through escape games could be an interesting way of physically and
cognitively engaging them, and similar to other cooperative games
utilising positive interdependence to solve a complex task. Another
specificity of escape games is their materiality and embodiment of the
learner-player. While some cooperative games in sports education are
based on embodiment and materiality (objects mediating the
interactions), the embodiment and materiality for CT learning through
escape games lead to a very specific learning activity engaging the
learner in a multi-sensorial way of learning.

Board games are described as a medium to support and evaluate the
players’ CT

components. In this paper, we will be evaluating educational escape
games with reference to the CT components described by Romero, Lepage
and Lille [15]. According to Berland and Lee [22], board games can help
with this analysis better than digital games since in the digital
version the game rules are strictly enforced by game mechanics, whereas
in board and other tabletop games players are required to plan and
execute strategies based on their knowledge of the game rules, thereby
resorting to CT. They conducted a study on three groups of novice
players (aged 17 to 19 years) using Pandemic, a strategy-based board
game, in which players have to fight against four highly infectious
diseases that are spreading in various cities across the world by
collecting, sharing and using the information to ultimately win the game
2. They analysed the responses of players in the

2 We invite the reader to play Pandemic game here: http://pandemic2.org/

five elements of procedural CT, which include conditional action
(deciding on the best moves within the game), algorithm building
(devising a plan-of-action, which can be reused later for other moves),
debugging (identifying errors based on moves taken and their impact on
the game), simulation (using hypotheses to test possible outcomes) and
distributed computing (information sharing by different players while
strategizing based on a rule-based plan). Berland and Lee [22] ended the
paper on the note that while board games could positively contribute by
helping players to develop CT components, further research was needed in
this area.

In another example, Apostolellis et al. [23] devised a board game, RaBit
EscAPE,

with the primary objective of promoting CT through collaborative play
for players between the ages of 6 to 10 years. In an informal study
conducted using this board game, two groups of three players each aged 8
to 10 years from an elementary school were asked to combine wooden bits
(that comprise varying magnet placements and polarity combinations) to
first construct blocks and then paths over a predefined route to help
the token (a rabbit) escape from the apes (bits that need to be repelled
from the path). In this way, players are challenged to use logical
thinking to analyse and organise data, algorithmic thinking to come up
with the steps to be followed, simulation to identify and experiment
with possible solutions, debugging when a possible solution doesn’t
work, as well as problem-solving and collaborative thinking, among other
social competencies. The RaBit EscAPE game covers the problem analysis
component of CT, which includes problem identification, organisation and
modelling. It also makes players use sequencing, conditional logic and
algorithm building skills that come under formal systems and the
solution evaluation and iteration component. In the game, players
compete against each other by starting on the opposite sides of the
board to complete the path. By rolling the dice, they decide how many
wooden bits they can use in each move to build their path. They need to
strategize and hypothesize, thus using model building and simulation
skills, which are components covered under CT. The game uses a board
game without any digital devices; hence it doesn’t cover the physical
systems’ component. Another important aspect to be considered is that
since the writers conducted an exploratory study, the paper doesn’t
explain if the competencies mobilised by the players converted into code
literacy for them. The study of Apostolellis et al. [23] doesn’t address
CT assessment explicitly, but their study engages learners in a tabletop
escape game that covers most of the CT components, including logical
thinking, algorithmic thinking, simulation, debugging, problem-solving
and collaborative thinking. They concluded that there is a need to
further develop the evaluation of their unplugged board game activity to
understand its impact better.

Young learners can also be motivated to learn computer programming, and
therefore, CT, by using programming as a medium to integrate physical
and cognitive activity, one that requires learners to use their hands
and mind to achieve the given objectives [24]. A study was conducted in
China on seven children aged around 8 years with some prior knowledge of
computers but without any prior programming experience to test out this
idea. They used T-Maze, a physical programming tool for children between
the ages of 5 to 9 years, to play multi-level maze escape games and
build their own mazes by tinkering with some wooden blocks. This game
seems to be inspired by the concept of board games as well as escape
games. They connected wooden blocks, some of which are equipped with
magnets and others with sensors, to either move a virtual avatar on the
screen to escape from a maze (using sensor blocks) or build a new maze
by recreating a maze map and passable paths. TopCode [25], a computer
vision system, was used in the study to identify symbols on blocks to
convert physical programs into digital codes automatically. During the
play, children received real-time visual and audio feedback, which
helped them analyse and debug their programs. In T-Maze there was no
time pressure on learners to complete tasks. With this study, they
concluded that children were able to learn concepts of abstraction,
automation (loops), problem decomposition and analysis and creativity.
The authors also specified how children were able to create their own

programs, achieve a high level of engagement and that there was a
possibility that this game could help enhance children’s understanding
of CT.

Some researchers rely on digital versions of escape games to develop CT.
For

example, Program Your Robot [26] introduces learners to introductory
concepts of CT, while developing relevant competencies through a digital
puzzle-solving game. Players aged 17 to 19 years have to program a
virtual robot by following a set of rules and using programming methods,
such as sequence, conditionals, iteration and loops. They use a
progressive learning method, in which each level introduces players to
an advanced level of knowledge about CT competency. Though the writers
are yet to conduct a formal study of this game, they have collected
initial feedback from computer science students with prior knowledge of
programming. According to Kazimoglu et al. [26], students found this
game suitable to help them understand introductory programming concepts
and they mention that “this type of gameplay allows players to visualise
how programming constructs work” (p.7).

2.1 Educational escape games to assess CT

The previous section mentions various initiatives that support CT
development through educational escape games. However, there is also a
need for formative and summative assessment of CT that complements
learner activities. Since escape games are usually implemented through
diverse technologies and meant to be completed within a specific
duration, there could be a variety of possibilities for learning game
analytics in CT. Steiner et al. [27] cite the Society for Learning
Analytics Research (SoLAR) when defining learning analytics as “the
measurement, collection, analysis and reporting of data” (p.1). To
collect this data, they classify learning games assessment into
real-time game analytics and post-game analytics which help in “linking
observable game behaviour with…learning outcomes and competence…” (p.2).
In real-time game analytics, the assessment method is embedded within
the game design by taking into account criteria, such as level
progression, number of attempts, scores earned by a player and player
inputs including the time to start and end the game and clicks or
movements to accomplish a task. Post-game analytics include correlation
of learning objectives with the behaviours and actions of players, as
well as using post-tests and player feedback to collect and measure
data. In escape games, learning data could be collected through
observations during each play activity, by analysing video recordings or
manual logs of player behaviour and actions (using specific coding
schemas of the CT aspects to assess), or even pre-task or post-task
questionnaires on CT competency, such as the Computational Thinking Test
(CTT) [28]. In all these cases, there is a need to design the assessment
of CT at the instructional level to ensure that it supports CT
development in learners. Additionally, it could also be helpful for
educators to be able to certify the achievement of certain learning
objectives in relation to CT. We will be discussing different assessment
methods used by some tabletop educational escape games in the fifth
section of this paper.

3 Methodology

The objective of this study is to carry out a systematic analysis of
specific components and subcomponents of CT supported through tabletop
escape games. We have reviewed various published works in English on
educational escape games that aim to develop CT competency. The
literature references have been accessed using keywords that comprise
escape games, board games, tabletop games and game-based learning for
computational thinking. The primary sources for these papers are
ResearchGate, Google Scholar and ScienceDirect. Though we haven’t
restricted the papers by their year of publication, special emphasis was
given to review papers that covered educational escape games for
learners of diverse age groups, with varying levels of knowledge in
computer science and

using different gaming and learning approaches to introduce CT. The
different mediums used to implement these games include unplugged board
games, escape games with computer programming and escape games using
robotic tools.

*No published papers with escape games using educational robotics to
develop CT were found. Figure 2: Mediums used by various educational
escape games for CT

Another important criterion was to consider the CT components that were
being

covered through each of these games. In some of the papers, the writers
mentioned the assessment of creativity, collaboration and CT among other
competencies. Though we do not dispute their importance as critical
competencies, we have focused on papers that target the achievement of
these competencies by covering the main CT components.

At the initial stage, we began by searching for English papers on
educational escape games, with a special focus on digital or tabletop
games for CT development. We selected papers which focused on studies
conducted for CT development in K-12 education (for learners between the
ages of 6 to 19 years). A list of all the reviewed games and reasons for
eliminating them from the purview of this literature review is mentioned
in Table 2 of this paper.

Table 2: List of papers analysed for this paper

From this list, we shortlisted eight papers that use the concept of
escape games for CT. Out of these, we filtered and shortlisted three
tabletop games which include the RaBit EscAPE game [23], Pandemic board
game [22] and T-Maze [24] based on the characteristics of escape games
defined by Nicholson [16] and Clarke et al. [33] shown in Table 3.

Table 3: Checklist for Educational Escape Game Characteristics

Each of these three games meets six or more characteristics of an
educational escape game, as presented in Table 3. For example, in the
RaBit EscApe game [23], Apostolellis et al. used the theme of helping
rabbit tokens escape from enemy ape tokens to engage learners with the
CT topic. Though Pandemic has not been proposed as an escape game by
Berland and Lee [22], we have included it in our literature review for
this paper since it also meets most of the requirements of an escape
game. In their paper, the writers are studying whether this tabletop
game can help in the development of CT spontaneously during gameplay. It
is a collaborative game in which players need to escape from and avoid
the spreading of viruses into cities within the game by strategizing and
planning their moves. Similar to escape games, Pandemic is based on a
problem scenario that players need to solve by cooperating rather than
playing against each other within a stipulated time (before the four
diseases spread to all the cities). During the game, additional
challenges are introduced and players are expected to solve them by
sharing knowledge and discovering additional strategies. Their actions
impact the outcomes at

every stage of the game and the overall game outcomes as well. Lastly,
the T-Maze [24] game also uses the concept of escaping from a maze.

These games were shortlisted based on the information provided in these
papers about the methodology through which they identified observable
behaviours to ensure CT components were introduced among their players.
The remaining five papers were excluded from this literature review
since they propose an educational escape game that could be used to
develop CT, however, have not yet conducted any studies, formal or
otherwise, in which the game was played by learners and observed for its
effectiveness as a possible learning tool for CT. Even though only three
papers meet the selection criteria, the quality of the studies, the
diversity of game types chosen (Pandemic, RaBit EscApe and T-Maze) and
the level of the description provided us with ample information to
achieve the research objectives of our study.

3.1

Instruments and Coding

The systematic analysis of the shortlisted tabletop escape game papers
for CT development was conducted based on the components introduced in
the theoretical framework. Three researchers, with an expertise in CT
assessment, worked together to evaluate these papers and discuss the
ambiguities that appeared during the analysis process. While we have not
replicated the methodology of these games, we have analysed the
methodology and results of these studies. This analysis was developed
using a framework of six CT components based on Wing’s [5] definition of
CT.

4 Results

The table below is organised according to the CT components being
analysed. Coloured cells indicate those components which were not only
defined as a learning objective but also operationalised as observable
behaviours to be evaluated in each of the above- mentioned three games.

Table 4: Systematic analysis of the three tabletop escape games for CT
development

In the three games analysed in terms of the operationalisation of CT
competency in

this paper, the writers have specified that they are yet to conduct a
formal study to assess CT development. However, they have identified
what observable indicators will help in the assessment stage when an
empirical study is conducted.

From our analysis, we can observe that all the three games cover most of
the CT

components, including all the components under the problem analysis axis
as well as under the creation axis. Under the systems axis, most of the
games didn’t provide learners with the opportunity to gain an
understanding of the physical systems. Moreover, all three games
required players to use the concept of algorithms to achieve an
objective, but the players didn’t understand that they were using
algorithms. Writing codes was not accomplished in any of the games. As
specified clearly in the three papers, though the players used specific
CT components to achieve success in the games, those components didn’t
transform into an understanding of the underlying concepts that are part
of the CT competency. Next, we will provide references from each of the
papers about these assessment indicators for each of the subcomponents.

In the RaBit EscAPE game, the writers conducted an informal study using
an unplugged approach to develop CT competency. Based on their learning
from this initial study, they have given examples of how they will
assess the CT competency marked in Table 2 in future studies conducted
on this game. The observable behaviours are mentioned on page four of
their paper. To assess model formation and simulation, players should be
able to “form and contrast hypotheses” and “draw the blocks on the board
but without placing the bits”. Conditional logic will be identified when
players analyse polarity of the magnets on each wooden block in response
to the path to be created while repelling the ape blocks based on the
minus and plus signs (for example, “If I place this bit here, then this
block has a minus on the bottom and needs a big square piece with a plus
on the top”). This will also help players practice and understand
pattern recognition when “identifying which bits create blocks that can
fit the path printed on the board while also attracting adjacent blocks
or repelling ape blocks”. Players should be able to implement algorithm
building by “combining different requirements to build a set of steps
that will lead to an efficient solution of a problem”. To logically
organise and analyse data, players will have to arrange the wooden
pieces into blocks first and use block combinations that correspond to
the path to be built. Finally, though players won’t receive

real-time feedback, they’ll have to wait till they finish building the
path to attempt iteration and debugging (i.e., “in case of wrong
placement of bits, starting all over to complete the path in the correct
way”).

In the paper on the Pandemic game, the writers rely on the CT
definitions provided by Wing [5], Papert [14] and National Research
Council [36] and also use an unplugged board game for their study. As
they explain in the paper, they use the players’ conversations and
behaviours to systematically analyse whether the CT components were
developed through this game. Three teams of players were asked to play
the game separately and played within 60 to 90 minutes. To log the data
for analysis, the players’ activities were video recorded and
transcripts were generated from these videos. The videos were first
classified according to gameplay turns and then subdivided based on
utterances used by players. The utterances were then translated into
rule comprehension and strategies on the part of the players. Based on
this interpretative analysis, the writers created CT-related codes that
are being cited from page nine of this paper. Players practised
conditional logic when they had to “describe the chain of events that
might happen based on the game’s rules, should a particular action be
taken”. When the “player who moves their token to various spots and
declares the actions they would take without releasing the token (and
thus committing herself to a set of decisions)” (p. 9) they were
simulating and modelling possible strategies. By clarifying the rules or
strategies to be used in the game, the players resorted to the debugging
method. Formulating a plan of action helped the players build an
algorithm that can be generalised and used for future events within the
game. The writers claim that the purpose of this paper was to
demonstrate how computational thinking occurs through the gameplay of a
strategic board game. However, what appears to be lacking in the paper
is the comprehension of CT subcomponents among players, without focusing
on subcomponents.

the assessment of

these

The T-Maze game [24] uses a tangible programming approach. The writers
conducted

a study involving 20 children in a lab environment to improve CT in
“children’s programming activities” (p.5). Two kinds of activities in
the study included gameplay using maze escape and game programming using
maze creation. The paper describes how each CT component development was
observed during the game on page five of the paper. The players begin by
identifying the problem by “knowing the ports where the path starts and
ends, …connect them …with programming blocks”. They engage in organising
and modelling the solution by comparing their plans to select the
shortest path. Simulation can be observed when “children need to think
about how to perceive the world coordinates of the virtual maze and how
to map the behaviours in real world”. After the simulation, players have
to “map themselves into the virtual characters on screen and control the
characters’ behaviours” thereby implementing abstraction. The players
engage in using formal systems through automation when they program
using a run loop which “updates the feedback on screen and interacts
with users based on designed rules for sensors” to complete the escape
from the maze. Finally, they use real-time feedback to test and debug
their programs.

5 Discussion

Several attempts are being made to use escape games in CT competency
development across the globe, however, in most cases, there is a lack of
published literature on the activity, its evaluation methods and the
data to support its effectiveness. For example, Webby’s Challenge is an
escape room concept developed by Frey [37] in the USA to introduce CT
and coding activities to learners aged 10 years and above. Though the
website introduces and explains the method of implementing this game in
a classroom, the research data and learning game logs to support its
effectiveness are missing. Among the escape games published in gaming
platforms, Escape Code - Coding Adventure on

Steam is a digital escape game that claims to integrate the subjects of
coding, technology and artificial intelligence to allow players to learn
while playing. However, it doesn’t provide any description of the method
being employed or about its effectiveness in achieving the learning
objectives [38].

Escape games are primarily regarded as activities that require special
infrastructure

and additional resources, including a room dedicated for the game,
designers and facilitators, time and money to develop and evaluate the
game and its effectiveness. These requirements might dissuade many
educators from integrating escape games in their learning practices.
Using miniature representations of escape games, such as Breakout EDU
kits [39], is a great idea, however, the cost of such kits could be a
major concern for educational organisations from economically
marginalised countries. A welcome approach would be to use tabletop
escape games that can be created with a do-it-yourself approach which
would encourage educators and learners to create their own escape games.
Nevertheless, the design of a CT escape game would require them to
follow a method of introducing, developing and evaluating CT components.

One of the biggest limitations in the implementation of CT development
in K-12

education is in choosing the most effective medium of assessment, and
this becomes more challenging with escape games. Werneburg et al. [40]
refer to the assessment method used by Brennan and Resnick [41] who
performed interviews to evaluate aspects like idea development and
debugging of an activity based on their belief that CT cannot be
assessed from a binary state of yes or no in terms of whether a task has
been accomplished or not. They also mention the use of questionnaires by
Grover and Basu [42] to detect errors in an activity, but the presence
of errors in a programming syntax does not necessarily denote the lack
of the CT competency. Romero et al. [15] have identified three prevalent
approaches while assessing CT. The first type of assessment is followed
by the Computer Science Teachers Association’s curriculum in the USA,
wherein the content progresses based on grade, from low-level
programming to object- oriented programming, but doesn’t take into
account competencies such as creativity. The second approach is as per
the Barefoot’s CT model in the UK which includes assessing the learners’
ability to demonstrate logic, algorithms, decomposition, patterns,
abstraction and evaluation, but it doesn’t evaluate knowledge retention
after the assessment. The third approach is the kind that is followed by
Dr. Scratch [43], which automatically scores a Scratch program on
aspects, such as abstraction and logical thinking. However, as discussed
before, though Dr. Scratch provides feedback on how a program can be
improved, it does not take into account the objective that the learner
sets out to accomplish or “the task demanded” (p.6). In many of the
examples reviewed in this paper, there was a lack of information on the
logs or how the assessment of CT components was done through these
games. Some games, such as the RaBit EscAPE game [23], aim to develop
multiple competencies ranging from problem-solving to efficiency,
however, how the logs are developed are not clearly explained. When
using a strategic board game, such as Pandemic [22] to assess the CT
competency development, logs were maintained in the form of videos and
transcripts to evaluate game-turns and utterances between players and
translating these into codes for the strategies devised by players. But
further research is needed to evaluate whether such games can support
the development of CT competency.

Studies are being conducted to identify suitable assessment models and
tools for CT concepts. In their paper, Romero et al. [15] conducted a
study with 120 undergraduate students at Université Laval in Canada to
participate in a story2code creative programming challenge using Scratch
and used two tools to conduct their assessment, including Dr. Scratch
and #5c21, which is a tool developed by them wherein an educator
identifies observable states with four levels of achievement for each
activity. While Dr.  Scratch is automated, #5c21 requires human
expertise of the subject, and both tools assess different skills. Though
they were able to successfully log the achievement levels of students
through this study, the authors concluded by stating that this approach
needs to be further developed before it can be used to evaluate complex
activities aimed at

developing the CT competency. It can also be noticed that nowadays the
CT components on formal systems mainly focus on sequential imperative
programming (at the difference of collective protocols or other
programming paradigms such as functional programming) and only consider
basic scalar value or list. Taking into account more complex useful data
structures, other information coding issues, or other computational
science mechanisms, such as those used in machine learning (often called
artificial intelligence) is also useful. In both the educational science
challenges and the actual curricula, it is reasonable to restrain to the
former domain of sequential imperative programming with basic data
structures, but we can be fairly certain that more issues are going to
emerge in the near future, which necessitates further research on how
such competencies can be learned. Through escape games, CT assessment
can be developed through an engaging activity for learners in which the
embodiment is higher than other survey-based assessments [44]. To ensure
that an escape game could help achieve the expected learning outcomes,
there are a few other important points to keep in mind as well. For this
objective, we can start by identifying target players for whom the game
is being designed. It is also important to identify topics and
competencies to be covered and the learning objectives supporting the
game activity within a perspective of constructive alignment [53] [54].
An engaging escape game needs to have a clear problem-solving objective
and be based on a storyline that sets the tone and theme for the
activity. Since time pressure could hamper the learning process,
designers and educators need to decide on using it minimally or avoid it
altogether to ensure a positive learning experience for players. The
game design of escape games can consider the age and prior knowledge of
target players to correctly adapt the GBL activities. Based on the
existing research on game mechanics [40] [55] we can consider real-time
feedback mechanisms to keep players engaged in the learning process and
to enable them to debug their methods within the time constraints of the
game. However, further research should be developed to better understand
the way to consider time pressure and constraints in a way to support
engagement without hindering the learning process. Debriefing at the end
of every level or game must be integrated when designing the game to
ensure that learners understand the concepts and knowledge retention is
successfully achieved [25].

6 Conclusion

Through the systematic analysis of the literature on tabletop escape
games for CT competency development, the authors observe the potential
of these games to engage and sustain a learner’s interest in the game
while they develop CT competency. Through a detailed analysis of three
tabletop escape games for CT development, it is observed that both the
unplugged activities approach and the computer programming approach
could help the learners remain actively involved in the learning
process. Since escape games encourage players to use their
problem-solving and cognitive abilities, they can be used as serious
games for CT. Keeping in mind the different limitations that escape
rooms might have when used for educational purposes in diverse
educational backgrounds, tabletop escape games could be a possible
solution to ensure learner engagement in the learning activity. However,
a detailed review of these papers also highlights that the assessment
methods to evaluate the effectiveness of these games need to be
developed and tested in a more precise manner. The authors of this paper
propose that further research is needed to ascertain how tabletop escape
games can help in achieving the learning outcome of developing CT as a
competency among K-12 learners.

References

[1] A. Yadav, C. Mayfield, N. Zhou, S. Hambrusch, and J. T. Korb,
“Computational thinking in

elementary and secondary teacher education,” ACM Trans. Comput. Educ.
TOCE, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 5, 2014.

[2] V. Barr and C. Stephenson, “Bringing computational thinking to K-12:
what is Involved and what is the role of the computer science education
community?,” ACM Inroads, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 48–54, 2011.

[3] P. Curzon, M. Dorling, T. Ng, C. Selby, and J. Woollard, “Developing
computational

thinking in the classroom: a framework,” 2014.

[4] S. Y. Lye and J. H. L. Koh, “Review on teaching and learning of
computational thinking

[5]

through programming: What is next for K-12?,” Comput. Hum. Behav.,
vol. 41, pp. 51–61, 2014. J. Wing, L. Snyder, and J. M. Wing, “(PDF)
Computational Thinking: What and Why?” 2010. ISTE, “Computational
Thinking Leadership Toolkit,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://id.iste.org/docs/ct-documents/ct-leadershipt-toolkit.pdf.
[Accessed: 05-Apr-2019]. [7] V. J. Shute, C. Sun, and J. Asbell-Clarke,
“Demystifying computational thinking,” Educ.

[6]

Res. Rev., vol. 22, pp. 142–158, 2017.

[8] S. Grover and R. Pea, “Computational Thinking in K–12 A Review of
the State of the

[9]

Field,” Educ. Res., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 38–43, Jan. 2013. J. Wing, P.
Henderson, O. Hazzan, and T. Cortina, “• An Overview of Computational
Thinking,” p. 7, 2007.

[10] M. Resnick, “A Different Approach To Coding - BRIGHT Magazine,”
Medium, 26-Jun- 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://brightthemag.com/a-different-approach-to-coding- d679b06d83a.
[Accessed: 16-Jul-2019].

[11] A. Hershkovitz, R. Sitman, R. Israel-Fishelson, A. Eguíluz, P.
Garaizar, and M. Guenaga, “Creativity in the acquisition of
computational thinking,” Interact. Learn. Environ., pp. 1– 17, 2019.

[12] J. M. Wing, “Computational thinking,” Commun. ACM, vol. 49, no. 3,
pp. 33–35, 2006. [13] P. J. Denning, “The Profession of IT Beyond
Computational thinking,” p. 3, 2009. [14] S. Papert, Mindstorms:
children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books,

1980. 

[15] M. Romero, A. Lepage, and B. Lille, “Computational thinking
development through creative

programming in higher education,” Int. J. Educ. Technol. High. Educ.,
vol. 14, no. 1, p. 42, 2017.

[16] S. Nicholson, “(PDF)

Peeking Behind the Locked Door:A Survey of Escape Room Facilities.”
2015. [17] M. Resnick et al., “Digital manipulatives: new toys to think
with,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, 1998, pp. 281–287.

[18] S. Nicholson, “Exploring Gamification Techniques for Classroom
Management,” p. 7, 2013. [19] C. Obikwelu and J. C. Read, “The Serious
Game Constructivist Framework for Children’s

Learning | Elsevier Enhanced Reader,” 2012. [Online]. Available:
https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S1877050912008174?token=7E3B3840CDB9F237
2D611DFA7A6F23B1F4454EF18F8E547091816645291FCC89F62D0F3B2F2BB958D9C0
9980B7A20C95. [Accessed: 18-Jul-2019].

[20] S. Nicholson, “Creating Engaging Escape Rooms for the Classroom,”
Child. Educ., vol. 94,

no. 1, pp. 44–49, 2018.

[21] D. W. Johnson and R. T. Johnson, Cooperation and competition:
Theory and research.

Edina, MN, US: Interaction Book Company, 1989.

[22] M. Berland and V. R. Lee, “Collaborative strategic board games as a
site for distributed

computational thinking,” Int. J. Game-Based Learn. IJGBL, vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 65–81, 2011.

[23] P. Apostolellis, M. Stewart, C. Frisina, and D. Kafura, “RaBit
EscAPE: a board game for

computational thinking,” in Proceedings of the 2014 conference on
Interaction design and children, 2014, pp. 349–352.

[24] D. Wang, T. Wang, and Z. Liu, “A Tangible Programming Tool for
Children to Cultivate Computational Thinking,” The Scientific World
Journal, 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://www.hindawi.com/journals/tswj/2014/428080/abs/. [Accessed:
17-Apr-2019]. [25] M. Horn, “TopCodes: Tangible Object Placement Codes,”
2012. [Online]. Available:
http://users.eecs.northwestern.edu/~mhorn/topcodes/. [Accessed:
23-Sep-2019].

[26] C. Kazimoglu, M. Kiernan, L. Bacon, and L. MacKinnon, “Learning
Programming at the

Computational Thinking Level via Digital Game-Play,” Procedia Comput.
Sci., vol. 9, pp.  522–531, 2012.

[27] C. M. Steiner, M. D. Kickmeier-Rust, and D. Albert, “MAKING SENSE
OF GAME-

BASED USER DATA: LEARNING ANALYTICS IN APPLIED GAMES,” p. 4, 2015.

[28] S. Arnab et al., “Mapping learning and game mechanics for serious
games analysis,” Br. J.

Educ. Technol., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 391–411, 2015.

[29] K. Tsarava, K. Moeller, N. Pinkwart, M. Butz, U. Trautwein, and M.
Ninaus, “Training Computational Thinking: Game-Based Unplugged and
Plugged-in Activities in Primary School,” in European Conference on
Games Based Learning, 2017, pp. 687–695.

[30] T. Y. Lee, M. L. Mauriello, J. Ahn, and B. B. Bederson, “CTArcade:
Computational

thinking with games in school age children,” Int. J. Child-Comput.
Interact., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 26–33, 2014.

[31] A. Chaffin, K. Doran, D. Hicks, and T. Barnes, “Experimental
evaluation of teaching

recursion in a video game,” in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGGRAPH
Symposium on Video Games - Sandbox ’09, New Orleans, Louisiana, 2009,
p. 79.

[32] N. Brown, W. Darby, and H. Coronel, “An Escape Room as a Simulation
Teaching

Strategy,” Clin. Simul. Nurs., vol. 30, pp. 1–6, 2019.

[33] S. Clarke, D. Peel, S. Arnab, L. Morini, H. Keegan, and O. Wood,
“(PDF) EscapED: A Framework for Creating Educational Escape Rooms and
Interactive Games to For Higher/Further Education.” 2017.

[34] C. Borrego, C. Fernández, I. Blanes, and S. Robles, “Room escape at
class: Escape games

activities to facilitate the motivation and learning in computer
science,” JOTSE, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 162–171, 2017.

[35] S. Tarkan et al., “Toque: designing a cooking-based programming
language for and with

children,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in
computing systems, 2010, pp. 2417–2426.

[36] N. R. Council, Report of a Workshop on the Scope and Nature of
Computational Thinking.

2010. 

[37] S. Frey, “Webby’s Challenge: A Coding Escape Room,” Inverse Genius,
2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.inversegenius.com/gsl-blog/2018/5/1/webbys-challenge-a-coding-
escape-room. [Accessed: 06-May-2019].

[38] “Escape Code - Coding Adventure on Steam.” [Online]. Available:

https://store.steampowered.com/app/842350/Escape_Code__Coding_Adventure/.
[Accessed: 06-May-2019].

[39] “WELCOME TO BREAKOUT EDU,” Breakout EDU. [Online]. Available:

https://www.breakoutedu.com/welcome. [Accessed: 16-Apr-2019].

[40] S. Werneburg, S. Manske, and H. U. Hoppe, “ctGameStudio – A
Game-Based Learning

Environment to Foster Computational Thinking,” p. 10, 2018.

[41] K. Brennan and M. Resnick, “New frameworks for studying and
assessing the development

of computational thinking,” p. 25, 2012.

[42] S. Grover and S. Basu, “Measuring Student Learning in Introductory
Block-Based

Programming: Examining Misconceptions of Loops, Variables, and Boolean
Logic.” 2017. [43] J. Moreno-León, G. Robles, and M. Román-González,
“Dr. Scratch: Automatic analysis of

scratch projects to assess and foster computational thinking,” RED
Rev. Educ. Distancia, no. 46, pp. 1–23, 2015.

[44] M. Román-González, J.-C. Pérez-González, and C. Jiménez-Fernández,
“Which cognitive abilities underlie computational thinking? Criterion
validity of the Computational Thinking Test,” Comput. Hum. Behav.,
vol. 72, pp. 678–691, 2017.


