Editorial: Language and Robotics
Tadahiro Taniguchi, Takato Horii, Xavier Hinaut, Michael Spranger, Daichi

Mochihashi, Takayuki Nagai

To cite this version:

Tadahiro Taniguchi, Takato Horii, Xavier Hinaut, Michael Spranger, Daichi Mochihashi, et al.. Ed-
itorial: Language and Robotics. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 2021, 8, ￿10.3389/frobt.2021.674832￿.
￿hal-03533733￿

HAL Id: hal-03533733

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03533733

Submitted on 19 Jan 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

EDITORIAL
published: 12 April 2021
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2021.674832

Editorial: Language and Robotics

Tadahiro Taniguchi 1\*, Takato Horii 2, Xavier Hinaut 3, Michael Spranger 4,
Daichi Mochihashi 5 and Takayuki Nagai 2

1 College of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Kyoto, Japan, 2 Graduate School of Engineering
Science, Osaka University, Suita, Japan, 3 Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique (INRIA),
Rocquencourt, Île-de-France, France, 4 Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Tokyo, Japan, 5 Department of Statistical
Inference and Mathematics, The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo, Japan

Keywords: language acquisition by robots, multimodal communication, concept formation, symbol grounding in
robotics, symbol emergence in robotics, deep learning for robotics, emergence of communication

Editorial on the Research Topic

Language and Robotics

1. INTRODUCTION

Language in the real-world environment involves a wide range of challenges in robotics and
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). Service robots are required to communicate and collaborate with people
using language in the real-world environment. When a robot receives a spoken command from
a user in a domestic environment, the robot must understand its meaning in the context of the
speciﬁc environment. For example, to understand the meaning of “please bring me a pen in Takato’s
room” the robot needs to know where to ﬁnd a pen and where Takato’s room is. Futhermore,
words or expressions (i.e., sounds processed as symbols) can be invented naturally in our daily
environment and their meaning can change (Spranger, 2016) over time (i.e., depending on the
culture or age of the speaker). Robots thus need to adapt like humans to these versatile aspects of
language and demonstrate the ability to learn any language (Hinaut and Twiefel, 2019). In robotics,
language understanding inevitably involves multimodal learning, semantic mapping, and behavior
learning. To enable a robot to interact orally with people in a long-term manner, we need to develop
an AI that makes a robot learn and adapt to language in the real-world environment and in an on-
line manner. This topic thus raises several challenges to bridge the gap from low-level sensorimotor
interaction (Pagliarini et al., in press) to high-level compositional symbolic communication. Taking
inspiration of how children acquire language can help to design the simplest mechanisms to deal
with these challenges. Conversely, robotics can help modeling and test hypotheses about language
acquisition and language grounding (Cangelosi and Schlesinger, 2015; Taniguchi et al., 2016, 2018;
Hinaut and Spranger, 2019), in particular through cross-situational experiments (Taniguchi et al.,
2017; Juven and Hinaut, 2020).

Following the successfully organized session “Language and Robotics” held in IEEE-IROS 20181,
we organized this Research Topic. We aimed to publish original papers from robotics, natural
language processing, machine learning, and cognitive science to share knowledge about the state-
of-the-art machine learning methods and perspectives that contribute to modeling language-related
capabilities in robotics.

2. ABOUT THE RESEARCH TOPIC

We are pleased to present ﬁve research articles related to semantic mapping,
language
understanding, motion segmentation, symbol emergence, and language evolution. In this section,
we brieﬂy introduce each paper.

1The Workshop on Language and Robotics: http://iros2018.emergent-symbol.systems/home.

Edited and reviewed by:
Mikhail Prokopenko,
The University of Sydney, Australia

\*Correspondence:
Tadahiro Taniguchi
taniguchi@ci.ritsumei.ac.jp

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Computational Intelligence in
Robotics,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Robotics and AI

Received: 02 March 2021
Accepted: 08 March 2021
Published: 12 April 2021

Citation:
Taniguchi T, Horii T, Hinaut X,
Spranger M, Mochihashi D and
Nagai T (2021) Editorial: Language
and Robotics.
Front. Robot. AI 8:674832.
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2021.674832

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

1

April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 674832

Taniguchi et al.

Editorial: Language and Robotics

three papers

focused on language-related cognitive
First,
capabilities integrating real-world sensor information full of
uncertainty and high-dimensional. Each method involves deep
learning methods dealing with high-dimensional uncertain real
data in robotics. Nagano et al. proposed a new machine learning
method called a hierarchical Dirichlet process-variational
autoencoder-Gaussian process-hidden semi-Markov model
(HVGH). The method extended a hierarchical Dirichlet
process-Gaussian process-hidden semi-Markov model (HDP-
GP-HSMM) that can automatically segment time series data.
HVGH integrated variational autoencoder and the HDP-GP-
HSMM and achieved automatic motion segmentation along
with representation learning. Katsumata et al. proposed a
statistical semantic mapping method called SpCoMapping,
which means spatial concept formation and semantic mapping.
The proposed model employed Markov random ﬁeld into a
pre-existing spatial concept formation method and became
able to learn the arbitrary shape of a place on a map. The
language,
method integrated multimodal
vision, and position, to ﬁnd semantic information of places.
Tada et al. proposed a robust language understanding method
by introducing noise injection into the sequence-to-sequence
network. Recently, semantic parsing that enables a robot to
understand the meaning of human user commands is developed
based on deep learning methods. However, semantic parsing in
natural language processing does not assume the existence of
speech recognition errors. This paper showed the conventional
idea of noise injection to sequence-to-sequence network
semantic parsing can improve the robustness of a robot’s
language understanding.

information, e.g.,

Second, two papers focused on the emergence, or evolution,
of symbols. Cambier et al. described the perspectives of language
evolution in swarm robotics. They advocated an approach based
on language games for the further development of emergent
communication in swarm robots. They suggested that swarm
robotics can be an ideal testbed to advance research on the
emergence of language-like communication. Hagiwara et al.
proposed a new computational model representing symbol
emergence. The model proposed in this paper regarded symbol
emergence as a multiagent multimodal categorization problem.
The convergence of
the algorithm was guaranteed based
on the theory of Markov chain Monte Carlo. This symbol
involved sharing signs among agents and
emergence model

REFERENCES

Cangelosi, A., and Schlesinger, M. (2015). Developmental Robotics: From Babies to

Robots. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hinaut, X., and Spranger, M. (2019). “Learning to parse grounded language
using reservoir computing,” in 2019 Joint IEEE 9th International Conference
on Development and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL-EpiRob) (Oslo:
IEEE), 266–271.

making each agent form internal representations based on its
sensorimotor information.

3. NEXT STEP

With the great success of this Research Topic, we organized
related workshops and a tutorial2. A survey paper related
to this topic has already been published (Tangiuchi et al.,
2019). We believe that integrating low-level and high-level
cognitive capabilities (Nakamura et al., 2018; Taniguchi et al.,
2020) in conjunction with language learning in the real-world
environment is crucial to creating an artiﬁcial cognitive system,
i.e., a robot, which can conduct lifelong learning in the real-world
environment and achieves long-term human-robot interaction to
support daily human activities. The intersection of language and
robotics is a crucial Research Topic for further advancement in
robotics and AI. We hope that this special issue will accelerate the
cutting-edge studies in robotics and AI that aim to create human-
level embodied AI that can communicate and collaborate with
people in the real-world environment.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.

FUNDING

This Research Topic was partially supported by a Grant-in-
Aid for Scientiﬁc Research 18H03308 and 16H06569, funded
by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, and Science, and
Technology, Japan, by CREST (JPMJCR15E3).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of
participants in this special issue.

2A ﬁrst workshop was on Deep Probabilistic Generative Models for Cognitive
Architecture in Robotics: https://sites.google.com/site/dpgmcar2019/. A second
workshop was on Sensorimotor Interaction, Language and Embodiment of
Symbols (SMILES): https://sites.google.com/view/smiles-workshop/. The tutorial
was on Deep Probabilistic Generative Models for Robotics: https://sites.google.
com/view/dpgmfr/home.

.

Nakamura, T., Nagai, T., and Taniguchi, T. (2018). Serket: an architecture for
connecting stochastic models to realize a large-scale cognitive model. Front.
Neurorobot. 12:25. doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2018.00025

Pagliarini, S., Leblois, A., and Hinaut, X. (in press). Vocal

imitation in
sensorimotor learning models: a comparative review. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev.
Syst. doi: 10.1109/TCDS.2020.3041179

Spranger, M. (2016). The Evolution of Grounded Spatial Language. Language

Science Press (Berlin).

Hinaut, X., and Twiefel, J. (2019). Teach your robot your language! trainable neural
parser for modeling human sentence processing: Examples for 15 languages.
IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 12, 179–188. doi: 10.1109/TCDS.2019.2957006

Tangiuchi, T., Mochihashi, D., Nagai, T., Uchida, S., Inoue, N., Kobayashi, I., et al.
(2019). Survey on frontiers of language and robotics. Adv. Robot. 33, 700–730.
doi: 10.1080/01691864.2019.1632223

Juven, A., and Hinaut, X. (2020). “Cross-situational

learning with reservoir
computing for language acquisition modelling,” in 2020 International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) (Glasgow: IEEE), 1–8.

Taniguchi, A., Taniguchi, T., and Cangelosi, A. (2017). Cross-situational learning
with bayesian generative models for multimodal category and word learning in
robots. Front. Neurorobot. 11:66. doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2017.00066

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

2

April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 674832

Taniguchi et al.

Editorial: Language and Robotics

T., Nagai,
Taniguchi,
T.,
and Asoh, H.
survey. Adv. Robot.
4622

T., Nakamura,
(2016).
Symbol
30,

706–728.

T.,
emergence

Iwahashi, N., Ogata,
a
10.1080/01691864.2016.116

robotics:

in

doi:

Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.

Taniguchi, T., Nakamura, T., Suzuki, M., Kuniyasu, R., Hayashi, K., Taniguchi,
A., et al. (2020). “Neuro-serket: development of integrative cognitive system
through the composition of deep probabilistic generative models,” in New
Generation Computing (Cham), 1–26.

Taniguchi, T., Ugur, E., Hoﬀmann, M., Jamone, L., Nagai, T., Rosman, B., et al.
(2018). Symbol emergence in cognitive developmental systems: a survey. IEEE
Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 11, 494–516. doi: 10.1109/TCDS.2018.2867772

Copyright © 2021 Taniguchi, Horii, Hinaut, Spranger, Mochihashi and Nagai. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

3

April 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 674832

