A Natural History of Skills Thomas Boraud, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P.
Rougier

To cite this version:

Thomas Boraud, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier. A Natural History of
Skills. Progress in Neuro- biology, 2018, 171, pp.114-124.
￿10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.08.003￿. ￿hal-01874690￿

HAL Id: hal-01874690

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01874690

Submitted on 14 Sep 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

A Natural History of Skills

1

A Natural History of Skills

Thomas Boraud1,2,3,4,*, Arthur Leblois1,2,3,*, Nicolas P. Rougier2,5,6,*

1 CNRS, UMR 5293, IMN, 33000 Bordeaux, France 2 University of Bordeaux,
UMR 5293, IMN, 33000, Bordeaux, France 3 CNRS, French-Israeli
Neuroscience Lab, 33000 Bordeaux, France 4 CHU de Bordeaux, IMN
Clinique, 33000 Bordeaux, France 5 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 33405,
Talence, France 6 LaBRI, University of Bordeaux, IPB, CNRS, UMR 5800,
33405 Talence, France * These authors contributed equally to this work.

(cid:0) Abstract …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….2 1.
Introduction ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………3 1.1. The
function(s) of the forebrain ………………………………………………………………………….4 1.2. Habits,
automaticity & skills ……………………………………………………………………………….5 2. Multiple
systems at work………………………………………………………………………………………….6 2.1. The mammalian
cortex ………………………………………………………………………………………7 2.2. The thalamus and the
basal ganglia……………………………………………………………………..8 2.3. Skill learning and
synaptic plasticity …………………………………………………………………..10 2.3.1 Hebbian
learning………………………………………………………………………………………..11 2.3.2. Dopamine and
reinforcement learning ………………………………………………………..11 3. Parallel emergence
across evolution ………………………………………………………………………..11 3.1. Lamprey
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………12 3.2. Fishes, frogs &
reptiles……………………………………………………………………………………..14 3.3. Mammals
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….15 3.4. Birds
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………16 Box 1
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….17 4. The automatization
of skills …………………………………………………………………………………….19 4.1. Distinct but
complementary roles ……………………………………………………………………..19 4.2. A
counter-intuitive hypothesis ………………………………………………………………………….20 4.3.
Compatibility with the alternative hypotheses…………………………………………………….20 4.4
The entanglement of two systems ……………………………………………………………………..22 4.5.
Computational Approach………………………………………………………………………………….22 6. Conclusion
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………25
Acknowledgement…………………………………………………………………………………………………….26
Bibliography……………………………………………………………………………………………………………..27

A Natural History of Skills

2

Abstract

The dorsal pallium (a.k.a. the cortex in the mammals) makes a large loop
circuit with the basal ganglia and the thalamus known to control and
adapt behavior but the who’s who of the functional roles of these
structures is still debated. Influenced by the Triune brain theory that
was proposed in the early sixties, many current theories propose a
hierarchical organization on the top of which stands the cortex to which
the subcortical structures are subordinated. In particular, habits
formation has been proposed to reflect a switch from conscious on-line
control of behavior by the cortex, to a fully automated subcortical
control. In this review, we propose to revalue the function of the
network in light of the current experimental evidence concerning the
anatomy and physiology of the basal ganglia-cortical circuits in
vertebrates. We briefly review the current theories and show that they
could be encompassed in a broader framework of skill learning and
performance. Then, after reminding the state of the art concerning the
anatomical architecture of the network and the underlying dynamic
processes, we summarize the evolution of the anatomical and
physiological substrate of skill learning and performance among
vertebrates. We then lay out our hypothesis that the development of
automatized skills relies on the BG teaching cortical circuits and is
actually a late feature linked with the development of a specialized
cortex or pallium that evolved in parallel in different taxa. We finally
propose a minimal computational framework where this hypothesis can be
explicitly implemented and tested.

A Natural History of Skills

3

1.  Introduction

The frontal cortex, the basal ganglia (BG) and the thalamus are
associated into a tripartite functional

loop known as the cortex-basal ganglia loop (CBG loop). Since the early
90s, we roughly subdivide this

broad network into 3 subparts, from the central sulcus to the frontal
pole: a motor loop, a cognitive

loop and a limbic loop. This terminology has been coined by
human/primate anatomists, physiologists

and clinicians according to the functions associated to the
corresponding cortical area. The motor loop

(a.k.a. the extrapyramidal loop for the anatomists) drives voluntary
movement and learning, the

cognitive loop performs planning and decision making, while the limbic
loop is in charge of emotions

and mood. Despite different functional roles, the similarities in the
architecture of these loops bring to

the idea that they share the same dynamical properties and process
neural information along similar

mechanisms. However, if everybody agreed that these processes lie
ultimately upon a focal activation

of a specific cortical area that triggers an action/decision/emotion (at
least in primates), there are many

discrepancies in the literature about the who’s who (what’s what?) of
the relationship between neural

substrate and functions (Daw et al., 2005; Graybiel, 2008; Pasupathy and
Miller, 2005; Samejima and

Doya, 2007).

The question is insidiously overshadowed by the triune brain theory
(1973) proposed by Paul D.

MacLean in the 1970s. Briefly, this theory assumes that the brain
evolved in three stages, each of them

adding new behavioral features to the ethogram (the inventory of
behaviors) of the species granted

with this upgrade. At first, appeared a reptilian brain (grossly the
diencephalon and the BG) that brings

instinctual behaviors (aggression, dominance, territoriality, ritual
displays, etc.). Then, the paleo-

mammalian complex (limbic system) involved in feeding, reproductive and
parental behaviors in

animals granted with the ability to display motivation and emotion.
Finally, species at the top of the

evolutionary tree were gifted with a neo-mammalian brain that allowed
them to perform abstract

thinking, planning, and for the most advanced of them language. Each
level inhibited the lower one

and the key to human neuropsychiatric pathology stems from defects in
these inhibition processes.

The triune brain theory was widely diffused because of its elegant
adequacy between structure and

function and vague similarities with Freud’s psychoanalysis theories. It
became familiar to a broad

popular audience thanks to authors such as Carl Sagan or Arthur
Koestler. Even if the triune brain

theory is long considered as outdated (Hodos and Butler, 1997;
Striedter, 2005), it is still influential in

psychology. For our concern, it influenced the neurobiology of decision
making, by establishing 3

dogmas: i) there is a hierarchical classification of higher brain
functions; ii) each function is underlain

by a specific anatomic structure and iii) structures compete against
each other in order to produce a

A Natural History of Skills

4

behavior. All the theories that have been proposed to explicit the
respective role of the different

components of the CBG loop (see below) encompassed these 3 features and
most (but not all of them)

considered that the cortex must be in charge of the more elaborated
brain functions and sometime

even is the ultimate umpire of the competition. This conceptual
framework gave birth to a flourishing

literature with partially overlapping concepts opposing automatism to
voluntary action, habits to goal

oriented behavior, model free vs model-based decision making, etc.

In this review, we propose to step aside from this conceptual background
in order to revalue the

function of the CBG loop. We will first briefly review the current
theories and show that they could be

encompassed in a broader framework of skill learning and performance.
Then, after reminding the

state of the art concerning the anatomical architecture of the network
and the underlying dynamic

processes, we will summarize the evolution of the anatomical and
physiological substrate of skill

learning and performance among a few classes of vertebrate. We will lay
out our hypothesis that the

development of automatized skills relies on the BG teaching cortical
circuits and is actually a late

feature linked with the development of a specialized cortex or pallium
that evolved in parallel in

different taxa. We will confront it to other current hypotheses on the
function of CBG circuits. Finally,

we present a minimal computational framework were this hypothesis can be
explicitly implemented

and tested.

1.1. The function(s) of the forebrain

As we stated above, most of the theories proposed lie in the contrast
between a deliberative behavior

that necessitates constant updating and an automatic process. Influenced
by psychology, this

automatic process has been coined a habit.

The first theory stands that the cognitive CBG loop supports
deliberative/planned behavior, while the

motor one support habits (Belin et al., 2009; Yin and Knowlton, 2006;
Yin et al., 2005). The former

dominates the latter acting in new context and relying secondary on the
more rustic motor system

when things become boringly repetitive.

In the second theory, the opposition is between the prefrontal cortex
(PFC) in charge of deliberative

processes and the BG supporting habitual behaviors (Daw et al., 2005;
Daw et al., 2006).

The third hypothesis is more innovative as it reverses the hierarchy and
emphasizes learning rather

than habits per se. It posits that the BG drive learning in the cortical
areas and become increasingly less

A Natural History of Skills

5

engaged in action performance decision making as the task is learned
(Graybiel, 2008; Helie et al.,

2015; Piron et al., 2016; Samejima and Doya, 2007). Our theory, which is
derived from this latter one,

encompasses the concept of habits in to the broader concept of skills as
it’ll be explained below.

1.2. Habits, automaticity & skills

When the literature about the neural anatomy of the decision-making
process comes under scrutiny,

it is important to keep in mind that authors coming from different
background use behavior with

different meaning. Those coming from a behaviorist background have a
very precise definition for

habits but consider goal-oriented decision making as a kind of default
mode response (Balleine and

Dickinson, 1992; Balleine and O’Doherty, 2010; Dickinson, 1985). For the
ones inspired by economics

(a trend often dubbed neuroeconomics), goal-oriented decision making
implies deliberative choice

while habits are unconscious automatisms acquired slowly after intensive
training that is less

systematically operationalized (Graybiel, 2008; Seger and Spiering,
2011).

Instead of focusing on the competition process between
habitual/automatic and goal-oriented

behaviors during a decision at a given time, we propose to reframe the
question around the dynamics

of skill acquisition. Each decision reflects the degree of skill
expertise acquired by a subject in a specific

field. According to this framework, explorative, vicarious behaviors are
the trace of an early stage of

skill acquisition while automatic stereotyped ones appear once skills
are consolidated. But the process

is continuous rather than binary and the border between the two extreme
forms of behavior is fuzzy.

Another important consequence is that we can identify cases in which the
skill is never automatized

by lack of time or because the anatomical architecture doesn’t allow it.

We propose then i) to substitute for habits the broader concept of
skills and ii) to include an

evolutionary dimension.

Motor skills, as opposed to habits, do not necessarily occur repeatedly
over time (Graybiel, 2008), but

involve many features of habits: (i) they are learned, and they become
(ii) automatic, (iii) stereotyped,

and (iv) inflexible after extensive training. We thus voluntarily step
away from the dependence of

habits on reward devaluation and its definition as opposed to
goal-directed behavior. We finally

propose to broaden the definition of skills to the cognitive and limbic
network, encompassing the same

properties as illustrated on the Table 1.

A Natural History of Skills

6

Flexible learning phase

Inflexible stereotyped phase

(acquisition/exploration)

(automatization/exploitation)

Motor

Skill acquisition

Stereotyped gestures

Playing behavior

Motor Babbling

Motor repertoire

Cognitive

Deliberative decision

Heuristics

Causality experience

Cognitive bias & expertise

Exploratory behavior

Attention & Memory

Limbic

Hedonistic exploration

Preferences & sexual orientation

Taste learning

Emotional lability

“Tastes”

Empathy

Table 1: classification of skills according to functional domains and
phase.

The migration from the flexible learning phase to the inflexible
stereotyped phase can be broken down

into three stages (Fitts, 1964): the cognitive stage (early
acquisition), the associative stage (smoothing

performances) and the autonomous stage (continuous improvement). From
our perspective, the two

first phases correspond to the flexible learning phase that is
characterized by an initial high level of

error (early acquisition) and correspond to the early exploration of the
parameter space, until a gradual

reduction of errors occurs (smoothing performances). The late phase
(continuous improvement)

corresponds to the full and automated exploitation of the initial
learning characterized by a very low

level of errors in the absence of any feedback. This also corresponds to
the proposal by (Anderson,

1982) where the author considers only two stages, a declarative stage
      and a procedural stage for the

acquisition of cognitive skills.

2.  Multiple systems at work

A Natural History of Skills

7

Before describing the natural history of skills, it may be useful to
start with a summary of the brain

structures involved in primates (including humans) and to describe their
evolution starting from the

most ancient vertebrates.

2.1. The mammalian cortex

In mammals, the brain circuits underlying skill learning and execution
encompass orbito-frontal cortex

(OFC), Prefrontal Cortex (PFC), Anterior Cingular Cortex (ACC), and
motor cortical areas: Premotor

Cortex (PMC), Supplementary Motor Area (SMA) and Motor Cortex (MC) per
se. They are organized

following a hierarchical manner: OFC is involved in valuation and
manipulation of abstract concepts

(Daw et al., 2006; Samejima and Doya, 2007), PFC and ACC are involved in
deliberative processes and

the motor areas are involved in the expression of behaviors (Alexander
and Crutcher, 1990b) and are

the major interface between the brain and the musculoskeletal system.
However, this interfacing is

highly variable from one species to another. For example, concerning the
motor areas, pyramidal

neurons reach directly spinal motoneurons in a significant proportion
only in primates, but not in

rodents or cats (Lemon and Griffiths, 2005). They indeed act more as a
modulatory system than a

driving system in the latter; decorticated rats (Whishaw et al., 1981)
or cats (Bjursten et al., 1976) can

still behave quite normally, unlike decorticated primates (Travis and
Woolsey, 1956).

The cortex is subdivided into 6 layers of neurons and comprises dozens
of different types of cell types.

The cortex is traditionally divided into multiple areas, which vary
based on their cytoarchitecture,

their inputs, their neurochemical signatures, the target of their
projections and their function. At

the microscopic level, each area can be divided into functional units,
the cortical columns, which

contain neurons that share the same receptive fields (for sensory areas)
or behavioral tuning (for

motor and cognitive areas). Briefly, the output of each column is
provided by the output neurons, the

glutamatergic pyramidal cells. On one hand, direct lateral excitation
between pyramidal cells from the

same or different columns provide the cortical columns with a mechanism
for self and mutual

excitation respectively. On the other hand, feedforward inhibition
mediated by GABAergic inhibitory

interneurons allows for lateral inhibition within and between columns
(Horton and Adams, 2005). As

the spread of lateral inhibition is thought to overcome that of the
lateral excitation, the net effect of

lateral interactions between columns likely tends toward mutual
inhibition, allowing competition

mechanisms between the columns that can drive behavior (Adesnik and
Scanziani, 2010).

A Natural History of Skills

8

2.2. The thalamus and the basal ganglia

The sub-cortical territories of the skill learning network include the
anterior thalamus and the BG.

Along a canonical model that was formalized back in the late 1980s,
cortical and subcortical structures

are organized into functional feedback loops (Figure 1) that influence
the dynamic properties of the

cortical areas (Albin et al., 1989; Alexander and Crutcher, 1990a;
Alexander and Crutcher, 1990b;

Parent and Hazrati, 1995a, b). The pyramidal neurons of the cortex send
axons to the Striatum and

the Subthalamic Nucleus (STN), which are the two main input structures
of the BG. The former is made

of several different populations of neurons of which the GABAergic
medium spiny neurons (MSN),

which represent more than 90% of the striatal neural population, are the
outputs. The latter is made

of at least one population of glutamatergic neurons. The main output
structures of the BG are the

internal segment of the Globus Pallidus (GPi) and the pars reticulata of
the Substantia Nigra (SNr).

Both are GABAergic structures. They send their inhibitory outputs mainly
to the anterior thalamic

nuclei (ventro-lateral and ventral anterior in primates) and also to the
brainstem nuclei. The thalamus

connects back to the cortex hence closing the loop with glutamatergic
connections. The dynamic

properties of the network are controlled by three pathways. The direct
pathway conveys the cortical

inputs through the striatum and the GPi/SNr. The indirect pathway is
tri-synaptic, encompassing the

striatum, the external part of the globus pallidus (GPe), the STN and
then the GPi/SNr. The hyperdirect

pathway corresponds to cortical input directly to the STN and then to
the GPi. The direct pathway

exerts a positive feedback on cortical area and the hyper-direct and
indirect pathways exert a negative

feedback (Mink, 1996; Nambu et al., 2000; Nambu et al., 2002).

Despite a topographic organization into at least three parallel
functional loops (Alexander et al., 1986),

controlling, respectively, limbic, cognitive and motor processes, the
system also shows converging and

diverging features. The reduction of the number of neurons from cortex
to BG output in primates, for

example, implies that one GPi neuron is influenced by more than one
million cortical neurons (Parent

and Hazrati, 1995a, b). This high convergence allows for the integration
of a multitude of features in

order to generate an appropriate behavior. On the contrary, the STN
connections to the GPi are sparse

and divergent. Because the STN is the common feature of the two negative
feedback loops

(hyperdirect and indirect), it makes this small structure the bottleneck
of a powerful lateral inhibition

system (Leblois et al., 2006a; Nambu et al., 2002). Indeed, even
far-apart cortical areas may inhibit

each other through the divergent cortico-subcortico-cortical pathway,
and the spatial extent of the

A Natural History of Skills

9

resulting mutual inhibition likely overcomes by several orders of
magnitude the extent of lateral

inhibition provided by cortical inhibitory interneurons. This classical
vision should be updated with

further connections inside BG (see Figure 1, in grey): the GPe also
sends direct connections to the SNr,

the GPi and with a specific population recently identified back to the
striatum (Mallet et al., 2012;

Mallet et al.). The anatomy of the striatum is also rendered further
complex by various populations of

GABAergic and cholinergic interneurons that make it more an integrative
structure than a simple input

layer (Parent and Hazrati, 1995a; Silberberg and Bolam, 2015). We
already demonstrated (Box 1) that

the CBG network encompasses all the necessary features to allow for the
selection of motor programs

out of the dynamic competition between the feedback loops (Leblois et
al., 2006a). We also show that

intrinsic noise is enough to shape motor output in new conditions
without the necessity of pre-existing

bias (Guthrie et al., 2013), making the system more efficient for
exploration in new environments

(Guthrie et al., 2013; Topalidou et al., 2015).

Outside the BG, there are other features that are often underrated and
may significantly contribute

to the dynamics of the CBG loop. Direct connections between the thalamic
nuclei and the BG shortcut

the cortical-subcortical loop. This second feedback loop possesses
similar dynamic properties as the

longer one (see Figure 1). The cortex also exerts a positive feedback to
the thalamus creating another

positive feedback loop outside the BG. It is extremely difficult to
understand the dynamics of neuronal

activity within these closed loop circuits with classical word models or
“box and arrow” models. As an

example, we have shown in the past that the closed loop structure within
the BG-thalamo-cortical

networks underlies the normal and pathological dynamics of neuronal
activity and can only be

revealed using the tools of non-linear dynamical theory (Leblois et al.,
2006). For this reason, we will

develop a theoretical framework to study the cooperation of the
cerebellum and BG.

A Natural History of Skills

10

Figure 1. Schematic view of the cortico - basal ganglia - thalamus
network (CBG) in primates. In black are showed the connections
considered in the “classical” model: the BG works a three layers network
- with 2 inputs (STN and STR), 2 outputs (GPi/SNr) and 1 intermediary
layer (GPe) - encompassed in a broad feedback loop to the cortex through
the thalamus. In grey are showed connections that have been evidenced or
emphasized in the last decade. GPe: Globus Pallidus pars Externa; GPi:
Globus Pallidus pars Interna; SNr: Substantia Nigra pars Reticulata;
STN: Subthalamic nucleus; STR: Striatum.

2.3. Skill learning and synaptic plasticity

Considering the organized cortex on one side and the powerful and
versatile cortex-BG-thalamus loop

on the other side, we have two systems that are able to drive actions
and skills on their own. The

former is able to perform well learned skills even if disconnected from
subcortical influence from the

BG (Andalman and Fee, 2009; Desmurget and Turner, 2010; Piron et al.,
2016; Turner and Desmurget,

2010), while the latter can also provide a sufficient substrate for many
complex behaviors (Bartus and

Levere, 1977; Jaldow et al., 1989; Kukleta and Libouban, 1967; Oakley,
1981). Why has such

redundancy been selected through the evolutionary process? What are the
advantages? What are the

costs? A first hint may be provided by the plasticity underlying the
learning process in each of the two

systems.

A Natural History of Skills

11

2.3.1 Hebbian learning. Even if there is a very diffuse DA innervation
of the prefrontal cortex, it is

supposed that at this level, plasticity relies mainly on Hebbian
learning (HL) principles (Keysers and

Perrett, 2004; Song et al., 2000). If two synaptically connected
cortical neurons are co-activated, they

reinforce the synaptic weight of the connection between them. It follows
that repetition of co-

activation will favor the genesis of neuronal assemblies that can be
re-activated together later. If this

connection is made through inhibitory neurons, it reinforces competition
mechanisms. This system is

simple and robust, but because of its insensitivity to the outcomes, it
lacks flexibility.

2.3.2. Dopamine and reinforcement learning. Since the seminal works of
Wolfram Schultz and his

colleagues, it is known that dopamine (DA) is a neural substrate of the
reward prediction error signal

in the reinforcement learning (RL) process (Apicella et al., 1992;
Fiorillo et al., 2003; Schultz, 1992).

Briefly the dopaminergic neurons of the pars compacta of the Substantia
Nigra and the ventral

tegmental area (VTA) are able to encode the difference between the
outcome of an action and the

expectation of the subject. This signal is used by the target of the
dopaminergic nuclei to modify their

synaptic weight and therefore increase or decrease the probability to
choose the same action in the

next occurrence (Schultz, 2006; Schultz et al., 1997). This synaptic
plasticity explains why performance

increases by trial and error. The synapses between the pyramidal neurons
and the MSN of the striatum

are the major target of DA output in the brain and therefore it is where
this plasticity is hypothesized

to occur (Schultz, 2006; Schultz et al., 1997).

3.  Parallel emergence across evolution

A picture starts to emerge with a cortical system that is able to create
robust neuronal assemblies that

drive behavior, displays the necessary dynamics to select a single
behavioral output and decide on its

own, but relies on a rather simple and unsupervised plasticity rule, and
a subcortical system allowing

more flexible behavioral adaptation thanks to more complex learning
rules, but which involves a much

larger and therefore slower and more energy demanding network. We are
already far from a ventral

deliberative system and an automatic dorsal one. Beyond the anatomical
and functional organization

of the brain, the triune brain hypothesis relies on a simplistic
conception of evolution as a ladder (scala

A Natural History of Skills

12

naturae), with the vertebrate brains going from “primitive” brains in
lower vertebrates to “evolved”

brains in mammals and ultimately humans, and the progressive and linear
acquisition of more and

more complex cognitive traits and behaviors along evolution. In the
following, we will argue that in

many vertebrate taxa, brains have evolved alongside to give rise to
complex behavior. We will

hereafter gather evidence that while an increase in the diversity and
complexity of behaviors appears

to require a growth of the dorsal pallium (DP), the control and learning
of complex skills always rely on

the interaction between the growing pallium and the “reptilian brain”,
namely the BG loops.

A look at vertebrate evolution and the parallel development of the
various brain areas involved in

motor control and skill learning may indeed shed light on the division
of labor at play during complex

behaviors. Vertebrate orders with quite distant common ancestors such as
fishes, birds and mammals

display contemporary species with complex skills such as avoiding
predators, catching prey,

communication, tool use and design, cooperation, etc. (Bird and Emery,
2009a, b; Gunturkun, 2012;

Patton and Braithwaite, 2015). These behaviors require planning and the
combination of multiple

elementary movements into complex motor skills. Interestingly, the size
of the pallium has increased

in all three aforementioned orders, and the most gifted contemporary
species display a larger

pallium/cortex to brain mass ratio (Figure 2). This high ratio is
somehow correlated to the number of

neurons in the DP but the relationship is far from linear
(Herculano-Houzel, 2011a, b; Herculano-Houzel

et al., 2006; Wullimann and Vernier, 2007).

Figure 2. Comparative evolution of the striatum and pallium in
vertebrates. the ratio of the brain mass devoted to the

pallium increase in parallel in various vertebrates’ taxa.

3.1. Lamprey

A Natural History of Skills

13

The lamprey, the oldest of all the vertebrates, appeared about 560
million years ago. Its relatively

simple nervous system makes it a model of choice for studying networks
involved in locomotor activity.

The lamprey is devoid of fins and moves by undulating its body composed
of a series of myotomes.

Each is controlled by a couple of glutamatergic generators. When a motor
command is sent into the

cord from the Mesencephalic Locomotion Region (MLR) of the animal, a
rhythmic activity is

propagated in the different segments of the animal with a rostro-caudal
shift generating a sinusoidal

movement of the body of the animal which allows its displacement through
the water. The MLR is

somatotopically organized, thus, if a differential stimulus is exerted
on the two sides, the animal will

turn in the direction of the one stimulated most effectively. The animal
can thus be piloted from this

structure that receives, among other things, inputs from the
diencephalon and especially from the

thalamus. The latter allows for the interfacing between the sensory
stimuli (visual, auditory, olfactory)

and the motor system and receives massive inputs from the BG.

Even if BG are not as individualized as in the mammals, they are
nonetheless composed of the same

populations of neurons all intermingled in a single basal ganglia
structure: MSN-like, GPi-like and GPe-

like GABAergic cells, STN-like glutamatergic neurons and various
interneurons (Grillner et al., 2013).

The functional organization is also very similar to the one of the
mammals: MSN-like and STN-like

populations receiving inputs from the thalamus and GPi-like sending
output to the thalamus and the

MLR. Between the input layer and the output, there are the three
pathways described above: the

direct, the indirect and the hyper-direct. Therefore, in lamprey, the
thalamus and the BG are organized

into a feedback loop very similar to the one described in more recent
vertebrates (see Box 1). From

this overall anatomical and physiological similarity, we can assume that
the dynamical properties of

the network are fundamentally the same. It implies that the competition
mechanisms that can elicit

the selection of motor programs (Leblois et al., 2006a) already exist in
the lamprey and can drive motor

behavior of the animal. Like mammals, the lamprey brain possesses
dopaminergic nuclei that innervate

thalamic-MSN synapses and an associated rudimentary limbic system able
to inform the dopaminergic

system about the rewarding value of actions. Even if it has not been
demonstrated yet, it implies that

lamprey already possesses the components of the RL process
(Stephenson-Jones et al., 2012).

The most crucial difference between lamprey and mammals is the lack of a
cortex. Instead they have

a DP that represents only a very small fraction of the brain total mass.
It is maybe already involved in

locomotion behaviors as recently suggested (Ocana et al., 2015), and
sends numerous input to the BG.

However, the role of the pallium in behavior in the lamprey is likely
limited. Beside its small side, the

DP of the lamprey is not as well organized as the mammalian cortex. It
consists mostly of excitatory

neurons organized in 3 layers and it is devoid of the columnar
organization and therefore it is highly

A Natural History of Skills

14

unlikely that this rudimentary pallium can offer a consistent selection
mechanism, in contrast with

mammalian cortex (Pombal et al., 2009; Pombal and Puelles, 1999).

3.2. Fishes, frogs & reptiles

Lampreys belong to the informal group of the anamniotes (a.k.a.
lower-vertebrates) that also includes

the fishes and the amphibians. For many species in this group, the
ethograms are quite limited:

foraging, mating, fight and flight. There are differences between
species in nuptial behavior or the

mode of foraging (some are herbivores, others are carnivores) but, more
importantly, some of the

more recently appeared species have developed much more elaborated motor
and cognitive skills,

including nest building (Kawase et al., 2013), predation or escape
strategies, or communication (Patton

and Braithwaite, 2015). The emergence of such complex behaviors
correlates with the growth of the

pallium in several fish clades (Vernier, 2017). Interestingly, the
development of the pallium during

embryogenesis follows a different path in different fish clades: in one
case (actinopterygians), the

pallium develops by eversion of the cerebral hemispheres, while in
another (sarcopterygians, from

which tetrapods and then reptiles and mammals evolved) the cerebral
hemispheres are shaped by an

invagination process. These two strategies for increasing pallial size
appeared independently during

evolution, supporting the idea of parallel development of the DP in
various phylogenetic branches that

independently allowed the emergence of complex behaviors. The increase
in pallial size leads to a wide

distribution of the coefficient of encephalization among fishes,
significantly overlapping with that of

birds and mammals, even if the main part remains lower (Wullimann and
Vernier, 2007). As in the case

of the lamprey, the central role of the Thalamus-BG loop in foraging has
been confirmed in some of

these species (Finkenstadt, 1989; Patton and Grobstein, 1998). Its role
in other behaviors remains to

be demonstrated, but it is highly likely.

The term “reptiles” refers to several lines of different origins
distributed in more than 9000 species.

The first reptiles appeared around 340 million years (Benton and
Donoghue, 2007). They exhibit a

greater diversity of behavior than anamniotes and for some species such
as crocodiles and lizards, a

relatively high encephalization quotient (the ratio of brain weight to
body weight) and more elaborate

social behaviors have been described (Brumm and Zollinger, 2017;
O’Connell and Hofmann, 2011). In

these species, the DP still represents less than 20% of the total
cerebral mass and the structure does

not differ significantly from that of the anamniotes.

A Natural History of Skills

3.3. Mammals

15

Mammals appeared around 220 million years ago. There are approximately
5,400 species in this class

that colonized deep water, land and air and it is among this class that
the richest and most varied

ethograms can be found, showing complex social behaviors (including
highly hierarchical organization)

and unprecedented cognitive performances. Two behavioral
characteristics, linked to each other,

distinguish them from other vertebrates. The first one is a period of
dependence of young mammals

that can last several years. The second is play. During the juvenile
period, much of the time saved on

the search for food is used to play (Bekoff et al., 1980). Although the
function of this activity is still

debated, it certainly has a central role in skill-learning processes
including foraging and social

behaviors. There is, moreover, a correlation between the complexity of
the social organization of a

species, the length of the juvenile period and the time spent playing
(Bekoff et al., 1980).

As we already stated above, beside its increase in size, the cortex
represents a very significant

improvement as compared to the DP, in particular its capacity to be able
to perform selection in

autonomy from subcortical feedbacks thanks to its architecture that
associates positive feedback with

strong lateral inhibition (Helie et al., 2015; Piron et al., 2016). The
complex organization of the cortex

may also be linked to the length of the juvenile period: it takes time
to be trained in order to develop

its own automatisms and therefore the period of infancy of the young
mammals may be partly devoted

to its training (in which game plays a significant role). A very
significant fraction of the ethogram is thus

controlled by the cortex, which can, under some circumstances, become
autonomous from the

subcortical inputs. During learning, the BG would play an important
guiding role in early phase of

training (Piron et al., 2016) while the strengthening of the
cortico-cortical connections would allow the

automatization and/or gradual development of habits, in which the cortex
can choose by itself (albeit

slower) if we disconnect the feedback after learning (Desmurget and
Turner, 2008; Desmurget and

Turner, 2010; Piron et al., 2016). This empowerment by the cortex thus
captures quite well the

dynamics of the goal-oriented decision making as well as automatic skill
execution. Convergent

experimental findings and theoretical investigations support this idea
that the “engram” of

automatized skills shifts to regions outside the basal ganglia after
sufficient training, including the

neocortex (Graybiel, 1998; Houk and Wise, 1995; O’Reilly and Frank,
2006; Pasupathy and Miller,

2005). It can also explain the transfer of stimulus response association
from the dorsomedial to the

dorsolateral part of the CBG loop: once the connectivity between the
cues and motor response is

strong enough, inactivation of the ventral part, do not modify the
response of the model. It could be

noticed that as long as a sub-cortical feedback occurred, habits are
reversible but it can take a very

long time. However, if for one reason or another, sub-cortical feedback
loops are disrupted, automatic

A Natural History of Skills

16

skills cannot be reversed and this may account for some motor or
cognitive disorders, such as tic or

addictive behaviors (Helie et al., 2015).

3.4. Birds

Birds offer an interesting comparison of parallel evolution with
mammals. They appeared 150 million

years ago (later than the first mammals) on a branch that also carried
the late dinosaurs (R.I.P.).

Although descending all from a common ancestor, the 10,000+ extant
species of birds present as much

behavioral variety as mammals. It concerns courtship rituals that can
take very different forms such as

singing, complex displays or dances but also forms of communication
concerning the establishment of

a territory, defense against predators or the foraging. Many species of
birds are also organized into

social groups (Crook, 1965). Cognitive abilities of birds are known to
be well developed. It is not a

coincidence that the 2-armed bandit task, the gold standard of decision
making task, was developed

in pigeons (Herrnstein et al., 1989). Caledonian crows are able to
develop the use of tools (Emery,

2006) and are also able to solve abstract problems such as the Aesop
      fable task (Logan et al., 2014)

with as good performance as seven-year-old children. Songbirds provide
also a significant example of

the extent of their learning abilities (Mooney, 1995; Nottebohm et al.,
1990; Tchernichovski and

Marcus, 2014). It is to be noticed that DP, thalamus and a part of the
BG (called area X) are the main

components of the neural network devoted to this ability. Playing
behaviors have also been described

in corvids and psittacines (Diamond and Bond, 2003). And finally, the
magpie is the only non-mammal

up to now that has passed successfully the mirror task for
self-recognition (Prior et al., 2008).

The enrichment of the ethogram of birds is correlated with the
morphological and functional

modifications of their encephalon. First of all, most of the birds
possess a higher encephalization

quotient than anamniotes and reptiles. But it is the development of the
DP which is the more

remarkable in these species. It represents more than 30% of the brain
mass and can exceed 50% in the

corvids (57% in the Caledonian crow) and some songbirds (Cnotka et al.,
2008; Herculano-Houzel,

2011b; Willemet, 2013). In some species, the DP organized itself in a
hierarchy of specialized nuclei,

with each nucleus controlling a specific behavior or interacting with
others to control more complex

behaviors (Pfenning et al., 2014; Puelles et al., 2000; Reiner et al.,
2004).

For social behaviors such as singing, it has been shown that in adult
birds, once the song is learned,

the animals can sing even if the feedback from the BG region called area
X is blocked (Bottjer et al.,

1989; Scharff and Nottebohm, 1991). Furthermore, motor corrections
implemented in the song to

A Natural History of Skills

17

correct vocal errors are initially driven through the CBG loop and later
incorporated into a cortical

pathway (Andalman and Fee, 2009; Warren et al., 2011). On the other
hand, decorticated pigeons can

still learn RL tasks (Cerutti and Ferrari, 1995). It implies that in
birds, BG are necessary and sufficient

for RL-based learning (Fee and Goldberg, 2011), but DP nuclei can work
autonomously, just as mammal

cortex, for stereotypic behaviors. These observations further suggest
that CBG circuits provide

behavioral adaptations that are subsequently stabilized by training
premotor cortical areas.

Box 1

A

S

B

THL1

THL2

Thalamus

S

Frontal Cortex

IN1

IN2

C2

C1

STR1

STN1

STN2

STR2

STR1

STN1

STN2

STR2

GPi1

GPi2

Basal Ganglia

SNc

GPi2

GPi1

Basal Ganglia

SNc / VTA

Unit 1

Reward

action 1

Unit 2

action 2

Inhibitory Excitatory Modulatory

Plastic Hebbian learning Reinforcement learning

THL1

THL2

Thalamus

Unit 1

Unit 2

action 1

Reward

action 2

Figure 3: A. A putative architecture for the selection of action through
a primitive model of the basal

ganglia and the thalamus (e.g. Lamprey). The stimulus (S) presentation
results in the initial co-

activation of two units in the thalamus (THL1 and THL2) until one of
them is inhibited through the

recurrent circuit (e.g. THL1 ⇾ STN1 ⇾ GPI2 ⊸ THL2) and allows for the
selection of the other.

Reinforcement learning occurs between Thalamus and Striatum. B. A more
elaborated model with

lateral competition mechanism inside the frontal cortex (e.g. primate).
The stimulus (S) presentation

results in the initial co-activation of the two units in the frontal
cortex (C1 and C2) until one of them

is inhibited through either the recurrent circuit (e.g. C1 ⇾ STN1 ⇾ GPI2
⊸ THL2 ⇾ C2) and/or through

the local competition conveyed by interneurons (e.g. C1 ⇾ IN1 ⊸ C2) and
allows for the selection of

the other. Reinforcement learning occurs between the thalamus and the
striatum while Hebbian

learning occurs between the parietal cortex (S) and the frontal cortex.

A Natural History of Skills

18

The interactions between neuronal assemblies in the cortex/DP, BG and
thalamus are believed to allow

the automatization of decision making and skills, as we describe in this
review. A few essential

mechanisms are postulated that allow the selection of motor programs
based on their outcome and

the automatization of this selection process (illustrated in the figure
3). These mechanisms are

necessary for the algorithmic implementation of the selection and
automatization process, and they

rely on the anatomical structure and physiological properties of the
network that have been revealed

by decades of experimental investigation. These mechanisms are the
following:

-   

A competition process: The selection of motor programs, long thought to
be at the heart of

the function of the BG-thalamo-cortical network (Marsden, 1982; Mink and
Thach, 1996). The

selection of a program, or selective activation of a given cortical
population in the presence of

ambiguous inputs, requires a competition mechanism by which one
population can inhibit

others when selected to avoid multiple activations. Such a competition
mechanism can be

implemented through lateral inhibition (REF cortex; Wickens et al.,
2007). In the present

review, we postulate that competition mechanisms exist both at the
DP/cortical level, through

mutual or lateral inhibition mediated by inhibitory interneurons, and in
the BG-thalamo-

cortical loop circuits, through the divergent STN-GPi connection that
mediates an inhibitory

interaction between various cortical populations (via the
Cortex-STN-GPi-Thalamus-Cortex

pathway, see Leblois et al., 2006). The latter mechanism could in
principle mediate

competition between remote cortical populations (the combination of the
STN-GPi divergent

connection and the feedback from GPi to frontal cortex allows inhibitory
interaction between

distant DP/cortical populations through the Ctx1-STN-GPi-Thalamus-Ctx2
pathway, see figure

above). This competition mechanism across the BG-thalamo-cortical
network is common to all

vertebrates, from lamprey to primates. The underlying dynamical process
rests on a symmetry

breaking process between parallel CBG circuits and has been described in
Leblois et al. (2006).

On the contrary, the former intra-cortical competition mechanism through
lateral inhibition in

the DP or cortex can only exist in animals which DP/cortex contains the
necessary ingredients

for lateral inhibition: a powerful inhibitory population in the
DP/cortex. Such mechanism

(Piron et al., 2016; Topalidou, submitted) could be implemented in
mammals and birds, which

cortex and pallium contain sufficiently strong lateral inhibition (REF).
Note that it only

competition allows between neighboring or ‘not-too-far’ cortical
populations (due to the

limited range of lateral inhibition),

-   

An outcome-dependent learning process: During the initial phase of skill
learning, the agent

(animal, human or artificial agent for modelling purposes) must learn to
select the appropriate

actions to optimize their outcome. This can be achieved only if the
plasticity rules applied in

A Natural History of Skills

19

the neuronal assembly driving the selection of the motor program depend
on the outcome of

the action. In the BG, it is long known that DA signaling denotes the
rewarding value of actions

performed (more exactly the reward prediction error, REF operant
conditioning?), and any

plasticity rule that is modulated by the dopaminergic signal will
therefore qualify as an

outcome-dependent learning process (see figure above).

-   

A Hebbian-like learning process: As the decision-making process or the
skill is repeated by the

agent multiple times, the automatization of the skill relies, in our
framework, on the ability of

the DP/cortex to imprint the link between a given sensory context and
the optimal action to

select. This can be performed with a simple Hebbian-like learning
process that ensures that

neuronal populations which are regularly coactivated reinforce their
connections (see figure

above), making their co-activation independent of any inputs from the
rest of the brain.

4.  The automatization of skills

4.1. Distinct but complementary roles

The observations made in the previous section provide us with several
clues regarding the respective

roles of the BG and DP in decision making and more generally the
execution and automatization of

skills:

i)  There is no evidence that the telencephalon plays a decisive role in
    the decision-making process

itself. Indeed, organisms with smaller telencephala (such as toads or
pigeons) are quite capable of

making goal-oriented decisions (Herrnstein et al., 1989). They are also
capable of learning, and

demonstrate the same tradeoff between exploration and exploitation in
the two-armed bandit task as

the most advanced mammals (Bradshaw et al., 1979; Dougan et al., 1985;
Gilbert-Norton et al., 2009;

Graft et al., 1977; Herrnstein, 1974; Lau and Glimcher, 2008; Matthews
and Temple, 1979; Morris et

al., 2006; Palminteri et al., 2009; Pasquereau et al., 2007).

ii) It strongly suggests a correlation between the development of the
    telencephalon and the

complexification of the ethogram. A larger DP/cortex brings a greater
diversity in the scope of the

decision, not necessarily an improvement of the decision-making process
itself. This diversity can be

expressed in several ways: by increasing the number of options
available, by sequencing the possible

answers, providing a decision tree that multiplies these options even
more, or by providing new fields

of application of the decision (Anderson, 1982; Boraud, 2015).

A Natural History of Skills

20

iii) The parallel emergence in mammals and birds of new structures of
     decision that are less sensitive

to outcome (i.e. cortical columns for the former and pallial nuclei for
the latter), and therefore allowed

automatic procedures, conferred a significant evolutionary advantage.

4.2. A counter-intuitive hypothesis

Facing the vast amount of anatomical and electrophysiological data
collected in various species of

mammals and birds, we propose to rethink the evolution of skill learning
and decision making as

follows. In earlier vertebrates, the BG-thalamus loop and BG-brainstem
loops drove most of the

animal’s behaviors. Dopamine dependent striatal plasticity allowed the
development of RL process.

The system is fairly adaptable but cannot learn “fast” habitual
reactions that shortcut the long and

relatively slow BG loops. As the output neurons from the DP (pyramidal
cells in mammals) increase

their direct contact to the motor control systems in the brainstem or
the spinal cord, this structure is

able to take control progressively of more and more behaviors. In
parallel, changes in the micro-

organization in mammals and birds, namely local inhibitory networks,
allowed for the emergence of

competition processes in the DP/cortical structures (see Box 1), which,
associated with HL, allowed for

the development of automatic skills.

Therefore, in the mammals and birds when it is necessary to learn new
skills, RL processes in the BG

train the DP/cortex that strengthen connections between
sensory/associative and efferent neurons

with HL processes in order to develop new skills that can be expressed
autonomously later as proposed

by Hellie, Ell and Ashby (2015). Many experimental data, thoroughly
reviewed by these authors,

support their theory in humans as well. It is tantalizing to link
playing behavior to this capacity: playing

allows for cortical skill learning that can be used thereafter to fight,
flight, forage, hunt or interact

socially.

4.3. Compatibility with the alternative hypotheses

The main alternative to our hypothesis stands that the development of
habits is underlain by a

progressive transfer from the associative loop to the sensorimotor one
(Belin et al., 2009; Yin and

Knowlton, 2006). As an example, a huge set of data in rats, monkeys and
humans involved the

A Natural History of Skills

21

associative striatum in flexible goal-directed behavior and the
sensorimotor striatum in rigid habitual

one (Le Masson et al., 2002; Lehericy et al., 2005; Miyachi et al.,
2002; Poldrack et al., 2005).

It has also been shown in rats that lesions of the associative striatum
can make the transfer of control

from the associative to the sensorimotor striatum faster (Yin et al.,
2005). On the other hand devaluing

the food reward in rats with lesions of the sensorimotor striatum,
reduces lever-pressing rates even

after extended training (Yin et al., 2004). It suggests that habits
cannot develop when this territory is

altered.

However, many results are inconsistent with this hypothesis. In
Parkinsonian patients, expression of

learned skills is somehow conserved (Asmus et al., 2008). In primates,
disconnecting the output of the

basal ganglia from motor cortex doesn’t disrupt the expression of
automatic behaviors (Desmurget

and Turner, 2010; Piron et al., 2016). Interestingly, these data have
been demonstrated also in

songbirds (Andalman and Fee, 2009) but not in rodents.

Can we incorporate these discrepancies in our evolutionary driven
hypothesis? One possibility is that

"the transfer of control from the associative striatum to the
sensorimotor striatum is more accurately

described as a switch from a ventral-based declarative memory system to
a dorsal-based procedural

memory one" (Helie et al., 2015). According to this hypothesis, "what is
tested as goal-directed

instrumental response recruits in fact networks involved in declarative
memory tasks, whereas

stimulus response association that is under the control of habit
learning (i.e., which immediately

precedes habitual behavior) depends on much the same circuitry as
procedural learning" (Helie et al.,

2015; Khamassi and Humphries, 2012). It also suggests that evolution has
segregated the dorsomedial

striatum and the dorsolateral striatum into separate learning systems.
If so, the results showing that

activation in the associative striatum precedes activation in the
sensorimotor one would reflect a faster

dynamic of learning for the dorsomedial striatum than the dorsolateral
one, rather than a sequential

process. This segregation may be a unique feature of mammals as it has
not been demonstrated yet

in other species.

Concerning the segregation between a subcortical system dedicated to
“habitual” behavior and a

frontal cortex dedicated to “deliberative” processes, it has been
shifted recently under the influence

of Machine Learning into a “Model-Free” vs “Model-Based” debate (Daw et
al., 2006; Khamassi and

Humphries, 2012). The BG are supposed to learn new associations by trial
and error without prior

assumptions while the cortex is able to generate representation of the
world that allows it to compare

each state to a predefined model onto which it can project the outcomes
of future(s) action(s). In fact,

we can reconcile this theory with ours by taking into account the fact
that OFC and the ventral PFC, for

example, receive massive inputs from the hippocampus that is involved in
the building of

A Natural History of Skills

22

representation of the world. These areas can merge thalamus mediated BG
inputs and hippocampal

information into neural representations of state dependent action(s).

4.4 The entanglement of two systems

To formalize our hypothesis, we proposed a theoretical model (Topalidou
et al., submitted) that is an

extension of previously published models (Guthrie et al., 2013; Leblois
et al., 2006a; Topalidou et al.,

2015). This model is centered around a simple two-armed bandit task that
aims to illustrate the main

concepts we’ve introduced. Even though the task is a decision-making
task, we believe the proposed

architecture and the associated learning mechanisms are generic enough
to be generalized to any

other task that involves the basal ganglia-thalamus-cortex loop.

4.5. Computational Approach

We provided previously an original model of action selection mechanism
(Leblois et al., 2006b), which

emerges from "the competition between a positive feedback through the
direct pathway and a

negative feedback through the hyperdirect pathway in the
cortico-basal-thalamic loop". In order to

explore the parallel organization of circuits in the BG, we then
upgraded the model (Guthrie et al.,

2013) such as it includes all the major nuclei of the basal ganglia but
      GPe and is segregated into three

loops (motor, associative and cognitive) that encompass also the cortex
and the thalamus (Alexander

and Crutcher, 1990b; Alexander et al., 1986). In this model, the cortex
is modeled by a single layer of

excitatory neurons. We realized that, although it reproduced fairly well
the behavioral and

electrophysiological signature of learning and choice in a two-armed
bandit task, it could not account

for the development of habits in primates (Desmurget and Turner, 2010;
Piron et al., 2016). In fact, its

architecture is closer to the decision-making network of early
vertebrates, with an archaic pallium

compared to that of mammals. To account for the development of cortex
with its specific dynamic

properties, we therefore incorporate a lateral competition mechanism in
all three cortices (motor,

cognitive, associative) based on short range excitation and long-range
inhibition. We also added

connections between the associative, cognitive and motor areas in order
to allow crosstalk among

these structures (Douglas and Martin, 2004). This competition process
granted our cortical network

with the capacity to make a decision by its own, although more slowly
than when the BG are active

(Figure 4).

A Natural History of Skills

23

In the early phase of learning, the system relies on intrinsic noise to
select one of the options.

The effect of phasic dopamine delivery on synaptic plasticity is modeled
by a RL process at the level

of cortico-striatal synapse in the cognitive territory of the network.
Therefore, the decision made at

the cognitive level can be used to bias the decision at the motor level.
Once a motor action has been

performed, HL modifies the connections between the cognitive cortex and
the associative cortex. The

latter process does not depend on reward but only on the choices. It is
to be noted that the cortical

selection, resulting from lateral competition in the cortex, needed more
trials to be strong enough to

bias a decision than the cortico-basal ganglia competition process such
that the cortex is initially driven

by the basal ganglia output (GPi), hence it learns from the statistics
provided by the BG selection.

Before the development of cortico-cortical connections, the level of
noise induces some irregularity

that match exploratory behaviors. It is also the behavior displayed by
our earlier model devoid of a

proper cortical layer (Guthrie et al., 2013) . Once the cortical
learning has developed automatisms, the

system is much less sensitive to noise and reaches almost 100%
performances. An interesting

prediction is therefore that lower-vertebrates such as lamprey or
anamniote should be able to learn

task by RL but should not be able to develop automatic skills.

A Natural History of Skills

24

Figure 4. Competition dynamic in the model. basal ganglia and the
cortex. Solid lines represent activity related to the selected
population, dashed lines represent activity related to the non-selected
population. Decision threshold has been set to 40 spikes/s between the
two cortical populations and is indicated on the x axis. Raster plots
are related to the cortical populations and has been generated from the
firing rate of 10 neurons. A) Activity in the motor populations in the
absence of lateral competition in the cortical populations. B) Activity
in the motor populations in the absence of the feedback from the basal
ganglia (GPi) to the cortical populations via the thalamus. Decision
threshold is reached thanks to the direct lateral competition in both
cognitive and motor cortical channels. C) Activity in the motor
populations in the full model with a dual competition, one cortical, one
basal. When congruent (cortical and basal decision are the same),
decision time for both the motor and cortical channels are faster than
in the absence of one of the competition loop (from Topalidou et al.,
submitted).

A Natural History of Skills

25

6.  Conclusion

We showed here that adopting a phylogenetic approach to the
decision-making network helps to

explain how it works in the species with the most complex brains, such
as primates. In this taxonomic

order, our conclusions are very close to the theory of the BG acting as
"a general training machine for

cortico-cortical connections" defended by Helie et al. (2015). However,
we show that it accounts for a

late phase of the evolution that appeared in parallel in mammals and
birds and maybe some fishes

that are able to develop automatic skills. In other species, subcortical
loops drive most of the behavior

and therefore even if they are capable of RL driven flexibility, they
lack the capacity to develop strong

automatic skills in order to optimize their performance.

The phylogenetic approach to understanding decision making is still in
its infancy. We should gather

information more comprehensively in lower vertebrates (fishes,
amphibians, reptiles), mammals and

birds in order to test our theory. For example, it has been demonstrated
that salamanders, an

amphibian with a brain architecture close to that of the lamprey, can be
trained to perform a

navigation task (Taylor and Adler, 1973). We just started an
experimental study to test whether it

relies on a classical DA dependent RL process and if we can
operationalize habitual behavior in these

species.

Incidentally, our theory provides a possible solution to an old
conundrum concerning BG human

pathology. In the classical view of the BG as a selection device (Mink,
1996), the effect of the

inactivation of the STN or the GPi as a therapeutic approach to
parkinsonism was paradoxical. But if

we consider that such surgical treatment is practiced in a Parkinsonian
patient old enough to have an

over-trained cortex in the skills they use on a day-to-day basis, one
can understand that it doesn’t need

the subcortical feedback anymore. And indeed, some experimental and
clinical data have been

gathered showing that in those patients learning of new skills is
disrupted (Jahanshahi et al., 2014;

Wilkinson et al., 2009).

We may also help to modify theories on addictions. Those disorders are
often considered as “bad

cognitive habits”. They were considered hitherto as subcortical
disorders. But according to our theory,

they should rely on abnormal cortical processes. Recent published work
seems to support this

hypothesis. Guillem and Ahmed (2017) showed an abnormal ratio of neurons
encoding for an addictive

A Natural History of Skills

26

substance in the OFC, but it will need more experimental evidence. It is
nevertheless a stimulating

thread to follow.

Finally, our theory provides an anatomical support to the think
fast-think slow theory developed by

Kahneman (2011). He proposed that human decision making is the result of
a competition between a

fast, automatic system that is prone to make mistakes and a slower, more
demanding system that is

more reliable. Kahneman himself never identified a neuroanatomical
substrate of his theory, but

many others have tried to put it in parallel with a triune brain
organization: the fast system being

associated to the “reptilian brain”, while the slow one is identified as
a product of the “neo-mammalian

cortex” (Crosby, 2015). In fact, our proposition takes the opposite
line. According to us, the slow

system is the older RL dependent cortico-subcortical loop, while the
fast one results from cortical

Hebbian associations. It implies that shortcuts (heuristics) rely on
cortical processes while difficult

decisions and actions relying on emotional and moral motivation rather
stand on a subcortical

substrate. It brings a fresh view to the psychology of decision making
and may help to unravel the

neural correlates of cognitive bias.

Acknowledgement

We thank David Hansel and Frederic Alexandre for early discussion about
the paper and David J. Perkel

and Erwan Bezard for helpful comments on the present manuscript.

A Natural History of Skills

Bibliography

27

Adesnik, H., Scanziani, M., 2010. Lateral competition for cortical space
by layer-specific horizontal circuits. Nature 464, 1155-1160.

Albin, R.L., Young, A.B., Penney, J.B., 1989. The functional anatomy of
basal ganglia disorders. Trends Neurosci. 12, 366-375.

Alexander, G.A., Crutcher, M.D., 1990a. Preparation for movement: neural
representations of intended direction in three motor areas of the
monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 64, 133-150.

Alexander, G.E., Crutcher, M.D., 1990b. Functional architecture of basal
ganglia circuits: neural substrates of parallel processing. Trends
Neurosci. 13, 266-271.

Alexander, G.E., DeLong, M.R., Strick, P.L., 1986. Parallel organization
of functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 357-381.

Andalman, A.S., Fee, M.S., 2009. A basal ganglia-forebrain circuit in
the songbird biases motor output to avoid vocal errors. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106,
12518-12523.

Anderson, J.R., 1982. Acquisiton of cognitive skill. Psychological
review 89, 369-403.

Apicella, P., Scarnati, E., Ljungberg, T., Schultz, W., 1992. Neuronal
activity in monkey striatum related to the expectation of predictable
environmental events. J. Neurophysiol. 68, 945-960.

Asmus, F., Huber, H., Gasser, T., Schols, L., 2008. Kick and rush:
paradoxical kinesia in Parkinson disease. Neurology 71, 695.

Balleine, B., Dickinson, A., 1992. Signalling and incentive processes in
instrumental reinforcer devaluation. The Quarterly journal of
experimental psychology. B, Comparative and physiological psychology 45,
285-301.

Balleine, B.W., O’Doherty, J.P., 2010. Human and rodent homologies in
action control: corticostriatal determinants of goal-directed and
habitual action. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the
American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 48-69.

Bartus, R.T., Levere, T.E., 1977. Frontal decortication in rhesus
monkeys: a test of the interference hypothesis. Brain research 119,
233-248.

Bekoff, M., Byers, J.A., Bekoff, A., 1980. Prenatal motility and
postnatal play: functional continuity? Developmental psychobiology 13,
225-228.

Belin, D., Jonkman, S., Dickinson, A., Robbins, T.W., Everitt, B.J.,
2009. Parallel and interactive learning processes within the basal
ganglia: relevance for the understanding of addiction. Behavioural brain
research 199, 89-102.

A Natural History of Skills

28

Bird, C.D., Emery, N.J., 2009a. Insightful problem solving and creative
tool modification by captive nontool-using rooks. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106,
10370-10375.

Bird, C.D., Emery, N.J., 2009b. Rooks use stones to raise the water
level to reach a floating worm. Current biology : CB 19, 1410-1414.

Bjursten, L.M., Norrsell, K., Norrsell, U., 1976. Behavioural repertory
of cats without cerebral cortex research. Experimentelle Hirnforschung.
Experimentation cerebrale 25, 115-130.

infancy. Experimental brain

from

Boraud, T., 2015. Matière à décision. CNRS éditions: Paris.

Bottjer, S.W., Halsema, K.A., Brown, S.A., Miesner, E.A., 1989. Axonal
connections of a forebrain nucleus involved with vocal learning in zebra
finches. The Journal of comparative neurology 279, 312-326.

Bradshaw, C.M., Szabadi, E., Bevan, P., Ruddle, H.V., 1979. The effect
of signaled reinforcement availability on concurrent performances in
humans. J Exp Anal Behav 32, 65- 74.

Brumm, H., Zollinger, S.A., 2017. Vocal plasticity in a reptile.
Proceedings. Biological sciences / The Royal Society 284.

Cerutti, S.M., Ferrari, E.A., 1995. Operant discrimination learning in
detelencephalated pigeons (Columba livia). Brazilian journal of medical
and biological research = Revista brasileira de pesquisas medicas e
biologicas 28, 1089-1095.

Cnotka, J., Gunturkun, O., Rehkamper, G., Gray, R.D., Hunt, G.R., 2008.
Extraordinary large brains in tool-using New Caledonian crows (Corvus
moneduloides). Neuroscience letters 433, 241-245.

Crook, J.H., 1965. The adaptive significance of avian social
organisations. Symp. zool. Soc. Lond. 14, 181-218.

Crosby, G., 2015. Fight, Flight, Freeze : Taming Your Reptilian Brain
and Other Practical Approaches to Self-Improvement. Crosbyod Publishing.

Daw, N.D., Niv, Y., Dayan, P., 2005. Uncertainty-based competition
between prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral
control. Nature neuroscience 8, 1704-1711.

Daw, N.D., O’Doherty, J.P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B., Dolan, R.J., 2006.
Cortical substrates for exploratory decisions in humans. Nature 441,
876-879.

Desmurget, M., Turner, R.S., 2008. Testing basal ganglia motor functions
through reversible inactivations in the posterior internal globus
pallidus. Journal of neurophysiology 99, 1057- 1076.

Desmurget, M., Turner, R.S., 2010. Motor Sequences and the Basal
Ganglia: Kinematics, Not Habits. J. Neurosci. 30, 7685-7690.

A Natural History of Skills

29

Diamond, J., Bond, A.B., 2003. A Comparative Analysis of Social Play in
Birds. Behaviour 140, 1091-1115.

Dickinson, A., 1985. Actions and Habits: The Development of Behavioural
Autonomy. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B,
Biological Sciences 308, 67.

Dougan, J.D., McSweeney, F.K., Farmer, V.A., 1985. Some parameters of
behavioral contrast and allocation of interim behavior in rats. J Exp
Anal Behav 44, 325-335.

Douglas, R.J., Martin, K.A., 2004. Neuronal circuits of the neocortex.
Annu Rev Neurosci 27, 419-451.

Emery, N.J., 2006. Cognitive ornithology: the evolution of avian
intelligence. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London.
Series B, Biological sciences 361, 23-43.

Fee, M.S., Goldberg, J.H., 2011. A hypothesis for basal
ganglia-dependent reinforcement learning in the songbird. Neuroscience
198, 152-170.

Finkenstadt, T. 1989. Visual associative learning: Searching for
behaviorally relevant brain structures in toads. In: Visuomotor
coordination. pp. 799-832. Eds. J.P. Ewert, M.A. Arbib. Plenum Press:
New York.

Fiorillo, C.D., Tobler, P.N., Schultz, W., 2003. Discrete coding of
reward probability and uncertainty by dopamine neurons. Science 299,
1898-1902.

Fitts, P. 1964. Perceptual-motor skill learning. In: Categories of human
learning. pp. 243-285. Ed. A. Melton. Academic Press: New York.

Gilbert-Norton, L.B., Shahan, T.A., Shivik, J.A., 2009. Coyotes (Canis
latrans) and the matching law. Behavioural processes 82, 178-183.

Graft, D.A., Lea, S.E., Whitworth, T.L., 1977. The matching law in and
within groups of rats. J Exp Anal Behav 27, 183-194.

Graybiel, A.M., 1998. The basal ganglia and chunking of action
repertoires. Neurobiol Learn Mem 70, 119-136.

Graybiel, A.M., 2008. Habits, rituals, and the evaluative brain. Annu
Rev Neurosci 31, 359-387.

Grillner, S., Robertson, B., Stephenson-Jones, M., 2013. The
evolutionary origin of the vertebrate basal ganglia and its role in
action selection. The Journal of physiology 591, 5425- 5431.

Guillem, K., Ahmed, S.H., 2017. Preference for Cocaine is Represented in
the Orbitofrontal Cortex by an Increased Proportion of Cocaine
Use-Coding Neurons. Cereb Cortex.

Gunturkun, O., 2012. The convergent evolution of neural substrates for
cognition. Psychol Res 76, 212-219.

A Natural History of Skills

30

Guthrie, M., Leblois, A., Garenne, A., Boraud, T., 2013. Interaction
between cognitive and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision
making: a computational study. Journal of neurophysiology 109,
3025-3040.

Helie, S., Ell, S.W., Ashby, F.G., 2015. Learning robust
cortico-cortical associations with the basal ganglia: an integrative
review. Cortex; a journal devoted to the study of the nervous system and
behavior 64, 123-135.

Herculano-Houzel, S., 2011a. Brains matter, bodies maybe not: the case
for examining neuron numbers irrespective of body size. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 1225, 191- 199.

Herculano-Houzel, S., 2011b. Not all brains are made the same: new views
on brain scaling in evolution. Brain, behavior and evolution 78, 22-36.

Herculano-Houzel, S., Mota, B., Lent, R., 2006. Cellular scaling rules
for rodent brains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 103, 12138- 12143.

Herrnstein, R.J., 1974. Formal properties of the matching law. J Exp
Anal Behav 21, 159-164.

Herrnstein, R.J., Vaughan, W., Jr., Mumford, D.B., Kosslyn, S.M., 1989.
Teaching pigeons an abstract relational rule: insideness. Perception &
psychophysics 46, 56-64.

Hodos, W., Butler, A.B., 1997. Evolution of sensory pathways in
vertebrates. Brain, behavior and evolution 50, 189-197.

Horton, J.C., Adams, D.L., 2005. The cortical column: a structure
without a function. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 360, 837.

Houk, J.C., Wise, S.P., 1995. Distributed modular architectures linking
basal ganglia, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex: their role in planning
and controlling action. Cereb Cortex 5, 95-110.

Jahanshahi, M., Obeso, I., Baunez, C., Alegre, M., Krack, P., 2014.
Parkinson’s Disease, the Subthalamic Nucleus, Inhibition, and
Impulsivity. Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement
Disorder Society.

Jaldow, E.J., Oakley, D.A., Davey, G.C., 1989. Performance of
Decorticated Rats on Fixed Interval and Fixed Time Schedules. The
European journal of neuroscience 1, 461-470.

Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, fast and slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux:
New York.

Kawase, H., Okata, Y., Ito, K., 2013. Role of huge geometric circular
structures in the reproduction of a marine pufferfish. Sci Rep 3, 2106.

Keysers, C., Perrett, D.I., 2004. Demystifying social cognition: a
Hebbian perspective. Trends in cognitive sciences 8, 501-507.

A Natural History of Skills

31

Khamassi, M., Humphries, M.D., 2012. Integrating cortico-limbic-basal
ganglia architectures for learning model-based and model-free navigation
strategies. Frontiers in behavioral neuroscience 6, 79.

Kukleta, M., Libouban, S., 1967. [Acquisition of instrumental
conditioning in functionally decorticated rats]. Journal de physiologie
59, 442.

Lau, B., Glimcher, P.W., 2008. Value representations in the primate
striatum during matching behavior. Neuron 58, 451-463.

Le Masson, G., Renaud-Le Masson, S., Debay, D., Bal, T., 2002. Feedback
inhibition controls spike transfer in hybrid thalamic circuits. Nature
417, 854-858.

Leblois, A., Boraud, T., Meissner, W., Bergman, H., Hansel, D., 2006a.
Competition between feedback loops underlies normal and pathological
dynamics in the basal ganglia. The Journal of neuroscience : the
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 26, 3567-3583.

Leblois, A., Meissner, W., Bezard, E., Bioulac, B., Gross, C.E., Boraud,
T., 2006b. Temporal and spatial alterations in GPi neuronal encoding
might contribute to slow down movement in parkinsonian monkeys. The
European journal of neuroscience 24, 1201-1208.

Lehericy, S., Benali, H., Van de Moortele, P.F., Pelegrini-Issac, M.,
Waechter, T., Ugurbil, K., Doyon, J., 2005. Distinct basal ganglia
territories are engaged in early and advanced motor sequence learning.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 102, 12566-12571.

Lemon, R.N., Griffiths, J., 2005. Comparing the function of the
corticospinal system in different species: organizational differences
for motor specialization? Muscle Nerve 32, 261-279.

Logan, C.J., Jelbert, S.A., Breen, A.J., Gray, R.D., Taylor, A.H., 2014.
Modifications to the Aesop’s Fable Paradigm Change New Caledonian Crow
Performances. PloS one 9, e103049.

MacLean, P.D., 1973. An evolutionary approach to the investigation of
psychoneuro-endocrine functions. Plenum Press: New York,.

Mallet, N., Micklem, B.R., Henny, P., Brown, M.T., Williams, C., Bolam,
J.P., Nakamura, K.C., Magill, P.J., 2012. Dichotomous organization of
the external globus pallidus. Neuron 74, 1075- 1086.

Mallet, N., Schmidt, R., Leventhal, D., Chen, F., Amer, N., Boraud, T.,
Berke, Joshua D., Arkypallidal Cells Send a Stop Signal to Striatum.
Neuron 89, 308-316.

Matthews, L.R., Temple, W., 1979. Concurrent schedule assessment of food
preference in cows. J Exp Anal Behav 32, 245-254.

Mink, J.W., 1996. The basal ganglia: focused selection and inhibition of
competing motor programs. Prog. Neurobiol. 50, 381-425.

A Natural History of Skills

32

Miyachi, S., Hikosaka, O., Lu, X., 2002. Differential activation of
monkey striatal neurons in the early and late stages of procedural
learning. Experimental brain research. Experimentelle Hirnforschung.
Experimentation cerebrale 146, 122-126.

Mooney, R., 1995. Behavioral learning. The illuminated songbird. Current
biology : CB 5, 609- 611.

Morris, G., Nevet, A., Arkadir, D., Vaadia, E., Bergman, H., 2006.
Midbrain dopamine neurons encode decisions for future action. Nature
neuroscience 9, 1057-1063.

Nambu, A., Tokuno, H., Hamada, I., Kita, H., Imanishi, M., Akazawa, T.,
Ikeuchi, Y., Hasegawa, N., 2000. Excitatory cortical inputs to pallidal
neurons via the subthalamic nucleus in the monkey. Journal of
neurophysiology 84, 289-300.

Nambu, A., Tokuno, H., Takada, M., 2002. Functional significance of the
cortico-subthalamo- pallidal ‘hyperdirect’ pathway. Neurosci Res 43,
111-117.

Nottebohm, F., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Cynx, J., Kirn, J., Ling, C.Y.,
Nottebohm, M., Suter, R., Tolles, A., Williams, H., 1990. Song learning
in birds: the relation between perception and production. Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
sciences 329, 115-124.

O’Connell, L.A., Hofmann, H.A., 2011. The vertebrate mesolimbic reward
system and social behavior network: a comparative synthesis. The Journal
of comparative neurology 519, 3599- 3639.

O’Reilly, R.C., Frank, M.J., 2006. Making working memory work: a
computational model of learning in the prefrontal cortex and basal
ganglia. Neural computation 18, 283-328.

Oakley, D.A., 1981. Performance of decorticated rats in a two-choice
visual discrimination apparatus. Behavioural brain research 3, 55-69.

Ocana, F.M., Suryanarayana, S.M., Saitoh, K., Kardamakis, A.A.,
Capantini, L., Robertson, B., Grillner, S., 2015. The lamprey pallium
provides a blueprint of the mammalian motor projections from cortex.
Current biology : CB 25, 413-423.

Palminteri, S., Boraud, T., Lafargue, G., Dubois, B., Pessiglione, M.,
2009. Brain hemispheres selectively track the expected value of
contralateral options. The Journal of neuroscience : the official
journal of the Society for Neuroscience 29, 13465-13472.

Parent, A., Hazrati, L.-N., 1995a. Functional anatomy of the basal
ganglia. I. The cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop. Brain Res.
Rev. 20, 91-127.

Parent, A., Hazrati, L.-N., 1995b. Functional anatomy of the basal
ganglia. II. The place of subthalamic nucleus and external pallidum in
basal ganglia circuitry. Brain Res. Rev. 20, 128- 154.

Pasquereau, B., Nadjar, A., Arkadir, D., Bezard, E., Goillandeau, M.,
Bioulac, B., Gross, C.E., Boraud, T., 2007. Shaping of motor responses
by incentive values through the basal ganglia. The Journal of
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 27,
1176-1183.

A Natural History of Skills

33

Pasupathy, A., Miller, E.K., 2005. Different time courses of
learning-related activity in the prefrontal cortex and striatum. Nature
433, 873-876.

Patton, B.W., Braithwaite, V.A., 2015. Changing tides: ecological and
historical perspectives on fish cognition. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Cogn
Sci 6, 159-176.

Patton, P., Grobstein, P., 1998. The effects of telencephalic lesions on
visually mediated prey orienting behavior in the leopard frog (Rana
pipiens). I. The effects of complete removal of one telencephalic lobe,
with a comparison to the effects of unilateral tectal lobe lesions.
Brain, behavior and evolution 51, 123-143.

Pfenning, A.R., Hara, E., Whitney, O., Rivas, M.V., Wang, R., Roulhac,
P.L., Howard, J.T., Wirthlin, M., Lovell, P.V., Ganapathy, G.,
Mouncastle, J., Moseley, M.A., Thompson, J.W., Soderblom, E.J., Iriki,
A., Kato, M., Gilbert, M.T., Zhang, G., Bakken, T., Bongaarts, A.,
Bernard, A., Lein, E., Mello, C.V., Hartemink, A.J., Jarvis, E.D., 2014.
Convergent transcriptional specializations in the brains of humans and
song-learning birds. Science 346, 1256846.

Piron, C., Kase, D., Topalidou, M., Goillandeau, M., Orignac, H.,
N’Guyen, T.H., Rougier, N., Boraud, T., 2016. The globus pallidus pars
interna in goal-oriented and routine behaviors: Resolving a
long-standing paradox. Movement disorders : official journal of the
Movement Disorder Society 31, 1146-1154.

Poldrack, R.A., Sabb, F.W., Foerde, K., Tom, S.M., Asarnow, R.F.,
Bookheimer, S.Y., Knowlton, B.J., 2005. The neural correlates of motor
skill automaticity. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal
of the Society for Neuroscience 25, 5356-5364.

Pombal, M.A., Megias, M., Bardet, S.M., Puelles, L., 2009. New and old
thoughts on the segmental organization of the forebrain in lampreys.
Brain, behavior and evolution 74, 7-19.

Pombal, M.A., Puelles, L., 1999. Prosomeric map of the lamprey forebrain
based on calretinin immunocytochemistry, Nissl stain, and ancillary
markers. The Journal of comparative neurology 414, 391-422.

Prior, H., Schwarz, A., Gunturkun, O., 2008. Mirror-induced behavior in
the magpie (Pica pica): evidence of self-recognition. PLoS biology 6,
e202.

Puelles, L., Kuwana, E., Puelles, E., Bulfone, A., Shimamura, K.,
Keleher, J., Smiga, S., Rubenstein, J.L., 2000. Pallial and subpallial
derivatives in the embryonic chick and mouse telencephalon, traced by
the expression of the genes Dlx-2, Emx-1, Nkx-2.1, Pax-6, and Tbr-1. The
Journal of comparative neurology 424, 409-438.

Reiner, A., Perkel, D.J., Mello, C.V., Jarvis, E.D., 2004. Songbirds and
the revised avian brain nomenclature. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences 1016, 77-108.

Samejima, K., Doya, K., 2007. Multiple representations of belief states
and action values in corticobasal ganglia loops. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1104, 213-228.

A Natural History of Skills

34

Scharff, C., Nottebohm, F., 1991. A comparative study of the behavioral
deficits following lesions of various parts of the zebra finch song
system: implications for vocal learning. The Journal of neuroscience :
the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 11, 2896-2913.

Schultz, W., 1992. Activity of dopamine neurons in the behaving primate.
Seminars in the neurosciences 4, 129-138.

Schultz, W., 2006. Behavioral theories and the neurophysiology of
reward. Annu Rev Psychol 57, 87-115.

Schultz, W., Dayan, P., Montague, P.R., 1997. A neural substrate of
prediction and reward. Science 275, 1593-1599.

Seger, C.A., Spiering, B.J., 2011. A critical review of habit learning
and the Basal Ganglia. Frontiers in systems neuroscience 5, 66.

Silberberg, G., Bolam, J.P., 2015. Local and afferent synaptic pathways
in the striatal microcircuitry. Current opinion in neurobiology 33,
182-187.

Song, S., Miller, K.D., Abbott, L.F., 2000. Competitive Hebbian learning
through spike-timing- dependent synaptic plasticity. Nature neuroscience
3, 919-926.

Stephenson-Jones, M., Ericsson, J., Robertson, B., Grillner, S., 2012.
Evolution of the basal ganglia: dual-output pathways conserved
throughout vertebrate phylogeny. The Journal of comparative neurology
520, 2957-2973.

Striedter, G.F., 2005. Principles of brain evolution. Sinauer
Associates: Sunderland, Mass.

Taylor, D.H., Adler, K., 1973. Spatial orientation by Salamanders using
plane-polarized light. Science 181, 285-287.

Tchernichovski, O., Marcus, G., 2014. Vocal learning beyond imitation:
mechanisms of adaptive vocal development in songbirds and human infants.
Current opinion in neurobiology 28c, 42-47.

Topalidou, M., Kase, D., Boraud, T., Rougier, N., submitted. Dual
Competition between the Basal Ganglia and the Cortex: from
Action-Outcome to Stimulus-Response.

Topalidou, M., Leblois, A., Boraud, T., Rougier, N.P., 2015. A long
journey into reproducible computational neuroscience. Frontiers in
computational neuroscience 9, 30.

Travis, A.M., Woolsey, C.N., 1956. MOTOR PERFORMANCE OP MONKEYS AFTER
BILATERAL PARTIAL AND TOTAL CEREBRAL DECORTICATIONS. American Journal of
Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation 35.

Turner, R.S., Desmurget, M., 2010. Basal ganglia contributions to motor
control: a vigorous tutor. Current opinion in neurobiology 20, 704-716.

Vernier, P. 2017. The Brain of Teleos Fishes. In: Evolution of the
Nervous System. pp. 59-76. Ed. J.H. Kaas. Academic Press: London.

A Natural History of Skills

35

Warren, T.L., Tumer, E.C., Charlesworth, J.D., Brainard, M.S., 2011.
Mechanisms and time course of vocal learning and consolidation in the
adult songbird. Journal of neurophysiology 106, 1806-1821.

Whishaw, I.Q., Schallert, T., Kolb, B., 1981. An analysis of feeding and
sensorimotor abilities of rats after decortication. J Comp Physiol
Psychol 95, 85-103.

Wilkinson, L., Khan, Z., Jahanshahi, M., 2009. The role of the basal
ganglia and its cortical connections in sequence learning: evidence from
implicit and explicit sequence learning in Parkinson’s disease.
Neuropsychologia 47, 2564-2573.

Willemet, R., 2013. Reconsidering the evolution of brain, cognition, and
behavior in birds and mammals. Frontiers in psychology 4, 396.

Wullimann, M.F., Vernier, P. 2007. Evolution of the Nervous System in
Fishes In: Evolution of Nervous Systems. pp. 39-60. Ed. J.H. Kaas.
Academic Press: Oxford.

Yin, H.H., Knowlton, B.J., 2006. The role of the basal ganglia in habit
formation. Nat Rev Neurosci 7, 464-476.

Yin, H.H., Knowlton, B.J., Balleine, B.W., 2004. Lesions of dorsolateral
striatum preserve outcome expectancy but disrupt habit formation in
instrumental learning. The European journal of neuroscience 19, 181-189.

Yin, H.H., Ostlund, S.B., Knowlton, B.J., Balleine, B.W., 2005. The role
of the dorsomedial striatum in instrumental conditioning. The European
journal of neuroscience 22, 513-523.

Abbreviations

ACC: anterior cingulate cortex BG: basal ganglia CBG: cortex-basal
ganglia (loop) DA: dopamine DP: dorsal pallium GABA: gamma-aminobutyric
acid GPe: external segment of the globus pallidus GPi: internal segment
of the globus pallidus HL: Hebbian learning MC: motor cortex MLR:
mesencephalic locomotor region MSN: medium spiny neurons OFC:
orbitofrontal cortex PFC: prefrontal cortex PMC: premotor cortex RL:
reinforcement learning SNr: substancia nigra pars reticulata STN:
subthalamic nucleus VTA: ventral tegmental area


