Implicit knowledge extraction and structuration from
electrical diagrams
Ikram Chraibi Kaadoud, Nicolas P. Rougier, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Ikram Chraibi Kaadoud, Nicolas P. Rougier, Frédéric Alexandre. Implicit knowledge extraction and
structuration from electrical diagrams. The 30th International Conference on Industrial, Engineering,
Other Applications of Applied Intelligent Systems, Jun 2017, Arras, France. ￿hal-01525028￿

HAL Id: hal-01525028

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01525028

Submitted on 19 May 2017

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial 4.0 International License

Implicit knowledge extraction and structuration
from electrical diagrams

Ikram Chraibi Kaadoud1,2,3,4, Nicolas Rougier2,3,4, and Frederic Alexandre2,3,4

(1) Algo’Tech Informatique, Technopole Izarbel, Bidart (2) INRIA Bordeaux
Sud-Ouest, Talence, France (3) LaBRI, UMR 5800, CNRS, Talence, France (4) IMN,
UMR 5293, CNRS, U Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
{ikram.chraibi-kaadoud,nicolas.rougier,frederic.alexandre}@inria.fr

Abstract. The electrical domain, either domestic or industrial, beneﬁts
from a huge set of well-deﬁned norms at both the national and interna-
tional levels. However and surprisingly enough, there is no such norm
regarding the actual conception and structuration of electrical diagrams,
even though the basic symbols and notations remain the same. Each
company is actually free to design such diagram relative to its own ex-
perience, expertise and know-how. The diﬃculty is that such diagrams,
which are most of the time materialized as a PDF booklet, do not re-
ﬂect this implicit knowledge. In this paper, we introduce our work on the
extraction and the structuration of such knowledge using ad-hoc graph
and text analysis as well as clustering techniques. Starting from a set of
raw documents, we propose an end-to-end solution that oﬀers a company
dependent structured view, of any electrical diagram.

Keywords: Knowledge extraction, knowledge representation, hierarchi-
cal clustering, knowledge structuration, electrical diagrams

1

Introduction

The electrical domain, either domestic or industrial, beneﬁts from a huge set of
well deﬁned norms at both the national and international levels. These norms
have to be enforced when designing a new electrical diagram and during the
actual physical construction of the circuit. In that regards, electrical workers
have generally to deal with a booklet describing the overall circuit splited into
several subparts, each one ﬁtting on a regular A4 sheet paper. This arbitrary and
constrained segmentation of the whole diagram implies a graph structure that
does not follow the logical structure of the underlying object. It is indeed quite
similar to the decomposition of an image into pixels sharing no similarities with
the inner structure of the image. The problem we are interested in this paper is
to ﬁnd original methods for discovering the implicit structure of electrical dia-
grams using the PDF description. In this context, we are working with a software
company, Algo’Tech Informatique, that provides a set of specialized tools for the
design of electrical diagrams. These tools are able to provide a synthetic view
of any electrical diagram and to produce the corresponding booklet. To do so,

2

Knowledge extraction and structuration

whenever Algo’Tech Informatique has a new customer, it gets its existing elec-
trical diagrams to analyse them and then adapt the database and the softwares
according them. Hence, Algo’Tech informatique experts face two challenges :
the ﬁrst one is to understand the reasoning and planning process of electrical
diagrams by their customers in order to formalize it. The second challenge is
to make the customer’s experts explain their work by supporting them during
the exploration of their own habits and knowledge. Besides, since each customer
designs freely diagrams according its own experience, expertise and know-how,
diagrams do not reﬂect the implicit knowledge. And yet this knowledge is im-
portant, since it holds the footprint of the customers. These ones are indeed
attached to their way of drawing and disposing electrical components inside a
circuit (they are able to recognize the work of their company whenever they see
it) and they are attached to continue to have it once they used Algo’Tech Infor-
matique softwares. So, to extract the ”footprints”, Algo’Tech Informatique has
to review the internal arrangement of electrical components into each page of
each electrical diagram and to compare the arrangements between them to ﬁnd
similarities. This work results from an extensive and non-automated collabora-
tion between the software company and the customer. It is also time-consuming,
informal (and not stricly replicable) and complex (documents mix texts and di-
agrams) in the sense that it results from non constrained interviews between
humans. Consequently, we aim for an automatic knowledge extraction process
speciﬁc to a customer and based on its past projects ( generally materialized as
a restricted set of scanned PDF booklets).

2 Review of existing work

2.1 Technical documents analysis

The capitalization of the knowledge of technical documents is a real problem in
the industry. From one hand, the ﬁeld of analysis of technical documents, which
has been investigated for several years in many kinds of domains is mostly fo-
cused on image analysis and recognition [1]. On the other hand, there is a great
deal of work in the ﬁeld of document analysis, including PDFs, in order to retrieve
the text content, but again, that leaves aside the graphical content [2]. However
in the domain of technical diagrams, both of these elements, text content and
image content, are important for the understanding and the interpretation of
documents. Another neglected ﬁeld is the diagram interpretation one. The iden-
tiﬁcation of the structure in a diagram, the semantics of its constituents and
their relationship, is almost always domain-speciﬁc which make global approach
diﬃcult. But, recently, [3] focuses on the problem of diagram interpretation and
reasoning by exploiting a deep learning algorithm that learns on a basis of 5,000
diagrams, one order of magnitude bigger than our 160 PDF booklets that we are
currently analysing (plus the 500 ones that we would like to test). These reasons
makes us to look for an innovative solution to analyse small volume of electrical
diagrams, without using standard methods.

Knowledge extraction and structuration

3

2.2 Expertise extraction

Another problem that industry faces is the expertise capitalization. Deﬁned as
an intellectual capital resulting from the knowledge and the experience from the
collaborators and/or the experts, the expertise is represented implicitly through
several documents. Using many diﬀerent methods, companies try to collect and
disseminate such expertise to all the employees, so that they can take advantage
from it. But even then, the challenge is still complex because of the experts
mental representation of their work. Indeed [4] conﬁrmed the existence of dif-
ference between senior experts and beginner experts mental representation. The
ﬁrst ones have a conceptualization rather of gist-type, more fuzzy, conceptual,
intuitive, using prototypes and high level concepts. In the opposite, beginner
experts have a rather verbatim-type conceptualization, which means detailed,
analytical, controlled, using low-level concepts.

There is thus diﬀerent ways to describe diagrams : through the explicit struc-
tured data and through the implicit structure or mental representation of the
experts. In the following section, we describe the knowledge extraction of raw
data using the titles and text into electrical diagrams (Figure 1, label A, B, C).
From this point, we will refer to Algo’Tech Informatique experts as experts, and
we will precise in other cases.

3 Raw data : Electrical diagrams in PDFs and DXFs ﬁles

Companies that draw electrical diagrams have to deal mostly with two type of
ﬁles : the PDF ones, the most commonly used type, and the Autodesk’s Drawing
Exchange Format (DXF). PDFs mix texts and diagrams and possess their own
local structure : Usually the PDF document has a title, a list of pages, and thus,
the circuit that goes through many pages, as in Figure 1. In each folio, there are
four important elements: its title, its number (diﬀerent from the page number),
the electrical components (and voltage indications) and its indication to other
folios. These last ones are the link that make the rebuild of the whole diagram
possible. A DXF ﬁle, in the other hand, is a Computer-aided design (CAD)
data ﬁle that enables data interoperability between many CAD softwares. It is
considered an open access format because it is basicaly an ASCII ﬁle that can
be read by text editors. Considered as an ASCII translation of a drawing ﬁle, a
DXF ﬁle, allow, by analysing the blocks and their attributes, to extract data and
meta-data related to electrical components symbols, in particular coordinates,
attributes and block name. It permits thus to avoid computer vision or image
recognition on the PDF ﬁles. Hence, since PDF booklets give a graphical view of
electrical diagrams using symbols and texts, and DXF ﬁles contain more techni-
cal data about the layout of the diagram into pages, the alliance of their analysis
enables a quasi-complete analysis of electrical diagram and a more exhaustive
interpretation.

4

4

Knowledge extraction and structuration

1st approach : From raw data to concepts

We present in this subsection a ﬁrst approach that allow us to conﬁrm hypoth-
esise regarding our data before to go further : for a given customer, just by
studying his electrical diagrams (PDF mainly), it is possible to put in light
a structure and dominant concepts that has a business meaning for him. We
wanted to get a global view of each electrical diagram to get a global idea about
the struture. For that, we transformed each diagram into graphs by mimicking
the expert’s reasoning. We used the following process : for each folio of each
diagram, we use the folio’s number (Figure 1, label B) as the id of a node and
the related folio’s title (Figure 1, label A) as the label of that node. Then, we
use the folio’s indication (Figure 1, label C) to establish links between nodes.
We thus manage to transform a linear booklet of many pages, into one single
representation holding in one sheet. This ﬁrst step make us realize redundancy
in folios names, so we extracted all the titles all booklets combined, to analyze
them and compute an intersection between them. We obtain thus a set of com-
mon words to all booklets that we will refer to as the concepts of the customer
from this point. These words were used as a replacement for the nodes labels,
which results in an homogenized set of graphs. Finally, all the simpliﬁed graphs
were merged into one global graph of concepts by aggregating links and nodes
gradually. We thus, obtain a single view of the customer business logic grouping
all the concepts that the customer have already used in his previous electrical
diagrams, and all the possible relations between these concepts. The ﬁnal graph
is, hence, a representation of the knowledge of the customer. Through this pre-
liminary work, we manage to do 2 things : First, we managed to group folios
according their content. Indeed, by doing the reverse path (from the abstract
view to the raw data), it is possible to group and analyse folios according to the
concept they belong to. This capacity to group folios according to the concept
will be used for the next section. Second, we structured raw data into a view of
the customer’s knowledge that put in light concepts and relations between them.
By doing this, we conﬁrm the existence of redundancy in the work or electrical
diagrams designers for a given designer, at least at the global level. In the next
section, we chose to focus on the layout of electrical components (Figure 1, label
D) into folios, in order to conﬁrm the existence of redundancy, and by extend a
footprint in the drawing.

5

2nd approach : Footprint extraction using datamining

This second approach is based on a second hypothesis : each electrical diagram
is an instanciation of the customer knowledge and by studying it, it is possible
to extract it. We thus based our work on the work of [5] and more recently [6],
that both deﬁned the KDD process as 3 steps : a pre-processing step, a data
mining step and a post-processing step.
Preprocessing Two treatments are done : the creation of data sets and their
transformation. Considered data are sequences : a set of electrical components

Knowledge extraction and structuration

5

extracted from each folio and ordered according their growing x, y coordinates.
We created two data sets : the ﬁrst one group sequences according the concept
they belong to, whereas the second gather together all sequences independently
of the concepts they belong to. Finally, each sequence is translated into a binary
vector of 25 units (since 25 families of electrical components exists according
experts), each indicating the presence or absence of a family into a folio.
Data mining Once the data prepared, we applied a Hierarchical clustering
(HC) method on the two sets in order, from one hand, to study and compare
the clusters that appear, and from the other hand, to put in light the footprint
into the sequences. We get inspired by the work of [7], who use the HC analysis
to rebuild the grammar (set of rules and patterns) from sequences. For further
technical details on this method, please refer to [8]. On each set of data, the
algorithm uses the Jaccard distance and average linkage method as parameters,
since it was the combination that shows the better Cophenetic correlation co-
eﬃcient. For every sets and subsets, it results in a dendogram (the standard
representation in HC) and a cluster-tree (a graph).
Post-Processing For every sets of vectors, each cluster obtained is described as
a binary vector corresponding to the union of the binary vectors of the previous
clusters. This work of identiﬁcation of clusters makes possible the comparison
between the clusters obtained with both data sets : Exception apart (folios which
weren’t plot at the expected location), all the cluster-trees of the ﬁrst data set
were found in the cluster-tree of the second data set. Thus, besides this approach
allows to put in light particular cases or mistakes in an electrical diagram, it also
shows that there is indeed recurrence and regularities into a cutomer’s working
way : it then conﬁrms the existence of a footprint.

6 Discussion

In this paper, we exposed two approaches we developed for knowledge extraction
and representation in the ﬁeld of electrical diagrams : the ﬁrst one creates a global
view of the customer business logic using graphs, on the basis of extracted text.
The second approach spells implicit knowledge out from the internal arrangments
of all the folios electrical components, using clustering analysis. It detects and
extracts patterns, that represent customers footprints, from data sets. These
two approaches complement each other in order to give a view of the electrical
diagrams that assist, improve and accelerate experts analysis. In a more global
dimension, this work shows that each electrical diagram is an instantiation of
the customer knowledge from which it is possible to reconstruct the expertise
knowledge as well as habits of work. The study of such habits is still an ongoing
work. In order to have the full picture, and to provide more assistance to the
experts, we are currently studying the electrical components sequences according
the wiring cables with the hypothesis that such sequences held more information
about the working rules and habits for a given customer. To explore this, we
propose a neural network approach in order to discover the ”grammar” rules
governing the sequence arrangement : the Elman model [7]. Our preliminary

6

Knowledge extraction and structuration

results indicate that it is possible to learn and to predict as long as the sequence
length is not too large. Tests and analysis are still on going and alternatives,
like other recurrent neural networks, are also considered. On the medium term,
by improving the expertise analysis and by extending the tools that assist the
designer in her or his work, we aim at showing that there is an implicit dimension
in the planning of every electrical diagrams as it was shown in [9].

Fig. 1. The organisation and content of a folio : A- the folio’s title, B- the folio’s
number, C- the folio’s indications, D- the electrical components, E- the caption block,
a frame surrounding the diagram. Sequences of electrical components according the
wiring cables in this folio are : Q100, Q101 and Q100, Q102.

References

1. Antoine, D., Collin, S., Tombre, K.: Analysis of technical documents: The REDRAW

system. In: Structured document image analysis. Springer (1992)

2. Futrelle, R.P., Shao, M., Cieslik, C., Grimes, A.E.: Extraction, layout analysis and

classiﬁcation of diagrams in PDF documents. In: ICDAR. vol. 3 (2003)

3. Kembhavi, A., Salvato, M., Kolve, E., Seo, M., Hajishirzi, H., Farhadi, A.: A diagram

is worth a dozen images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.07396 (2016)

4. Aim´e, X., Charlet, J.: IC: Ing´enierie des Connaissances ou Ing´enierie du Con-
formisme? In: 24`emes Journ´ees francophones d’Ing´enierie des Connaissances (2013)
5. Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P.: From data mining to knowledge dis-

covery in databases. AI magazine 17(3), 37 (1996)

6. Ramos, S., Figueiredo, V., Rodrigues, F., Pinheiro, R., Vale, Z.: Knowledge ex-
traction from medium voltage load diagrams to support the deﬁnition of electrical
tariﬀs. Engineering Intelligent Systems for Electrical Engineering and Communica-
tions 15(3), 143–149 (2007)

7. Servan-Schreiber, D., Cleeremans, A., McClelland, J.L.: Encoding sequential struc-

ture in simple recurrent networks. Tech. rep., DTIC Document (1989)

8. Hees, J.: SciPy Hierarchical Clustering and Dendrogram Tutorial (Aug 2015)
9. Cleeremans, A., McClelland, J.L.: Learning the structure of event sequences. Journal

of Experimental Psychology: General 120(3), 235 (1991)

