From computational neuroscience to computational
learning science: modeling the brain of the learner and
the context of the learning activity
Margarida Romero, Frédéric Alexandre, Lisa Roux, Gérard Giraudon, Thierry

Viéville

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Frédéric Alexandre, Lisa Roux, Gérard Giraudon, Thierry Viéville. From com-
putational neuroscience to computational learning science: modeling the brain of the learner and the
context of the learning activity. SophIA-summit 2020, Nov 2020, Sophia-Antipolis / Virtual, France.
2020. ￿hal-03018617￿

HAL Id: hal-03018617

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03018617

Submitted on 23 Nov 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

From computational neuroscience to computational learning science:
modeling the brain of the learner and the context of the learning activity.

Margarida Romero1, Frédéric Alexandre2, Lisa Roux1, Gérard Giraudon3, Thierry Viéville2,1

1. LINE research lab, Université Côte d’Azur, France
2. Mnemosyne Inria Team, France
3. EducAzur & Inria, France

In Computational neuroscience 
and bioinspired artificial 
intelligence (AI), different studies aim 
at understanding the mechanisms of 
perception such as shape recognition and 
sensori-motor coordination such as 
grasping or pinching. A step further, as in 
the Mnemosyne research program, cognitive 
mechanisms are analyzed to better 
understand brain circuits responsible for 
reasoning and problem-solving, by a 
biological or algorithmic agent.

Ill-defined problem engaging the participants in 
a task which goal requires to explore the four 
unknown cubes placed in front of the participant. The 
affordances are important in the process of 
understanding the material and its features to 
configure it in a way to solve the problem (goal state)

Goal : “build a 
vehicle moving from 
a red point to a 
black point” 

even on simple tasks of problem-solving, we do not yet have a model that encounters the underlying 
cognitive processes of the learner's brain, in link with the dynamic state of the activity system 
assessment that takes place at the task level. ⇒ the AIDE research program aims to build such models to 
better understand the interaction between brain processes and problem-solving activity from a 
behavioral perspective analysed based on learning analytics generated automatically, also through the 
human analysis of this activity based on coding schemes.

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE MODELING of executive functions allows to model the learner 
involved in a precise learning task. For instance, the prefrontal cortex encodes the 
outcome, or value, of an action (orbitofrontal), while action decision making and working 
memory is located in the dorsolateral part, in link with the basal ganglia for action 
selection and action reward processing and other brain
Structures.

Considering this effective functional model of brain
functions allows us to provide an operational model
of the learner behavior, in link with machine learning 
algorithms, such as reinforcement learning.

MEASURING LEARNING ANALYTICS during unplugged or tangible playful activities with 
low-cost devices in order to use them in concrete learning environment:

From wikipedia

Here computational thinking competences related to algorithm, data representation and 
information coding is targeted, in an autonomous learning setup.
Monitoring such activity influences the learning paradigm, involving the learner in a 
learning to learn process.

T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

LINE research lab has 
developed a methodology 
for the analysis of 
human creative 
problem-solving 
through a digital 
manipulative 
task-oriented approach. 

The French National 
Direction of Digital 
Education (DNE) at the 
Ministry Of Education 
(MENJS) has selected the 
LINE research team for 
being responsible of one 
of the 9 thematic 
workforces. The GTnum 9 
is devoted to the 
advancement of Artificial 
Intelligence in 
Education. 

 
