Temporal Dynamics in an Attractor Model of the Songbird’s Premotor
Nucleus Fjola Hyseni, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Fjola Hyseni, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier. Temporal Dynamics in
an Attractor Model of the Songbird’s Premotor Nucleus. COSYNE 2022 -
Computational and Systems Neuroscience, Mar 2022, Lisbon, Portugal.
￿hal-04443688￿

HAL Id: hal-04443688

https://hal.science/hal-04443688

Submitted on 7 Feb 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Temporal Dynamics in an Attractor Model  of the Songbird’s Premotor
Nucleus

Fjola Hyseni, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS,
IMN, UMR 5293, F-33000 Bordeaux, France  fjola.hyseni@u-bordeaux.fr

What do songbirds tell us about timing?

2.  Modiﬁng syllable duration

Temporal control is crucial for the generation of coordinated movements
during sensorimotor tasks. Like human speech, birdsong relies on a tight
muscle coordination, and songbirds have proven to outstandingly model
the neural substrate of action timing. In songbirds, premotor nucleus
HVC is responsible for the precise control of song tempo. Current
computational models of HVC rely on synﬁre chains.

Relying on a reward covariance rule, we show that the duration of a
syllable can be modiﬁed in response to a perturbed reward proﬁle, as
implemented in a widely used lab conditioning paradigm.

γ : learning rate parameter, , R(t): the reward, η: noise at the
postsynaptic neuron, rj: rate of the presynaptic neuron.

eligibility trace:

Synﬁre chains are however not robust to noise and function for a  narrow
range of feedforward weights (W, see ﬁgure below), requiring ﬁne tuning
during learning.

W = 2.8 mV

W = 3 mV

W = 3.9 mV

x e d n I

n o r u e N

x e d n I

n o r u e N

x e d n I

n o r u e N

90 layers of 15 neurons

Time (s)

Time (s)

Time (s)

2.9 mV

3.8 mV

No propagation

Timing Flexibility

Saturation

90 layers of 150 neurons

0.37 mV 0.41 mV

Ali F Pehlevan C and Olveczky. Nat Commun 9, 977, 2018.

Propagation of activity in a synﬁre chain model

Attractors dynamics and timing

Here, we propose that HVC neuronal dynamics may be modelled by attractor
dynamics, where recurrent connections allow the formation of a
travelling activity bump with robust functional properties.

Net Connectivity Proﬁle

Feature space (x: preferred timing during song)

ΔW Decreasing the duration

Syllable duration distribution in ms

Weight matrix

ΔW Increasing the duration

Changes in synaptic connectivity when the syllable is targeted for
shortening vs lengthening

Change in weights, averaged across the targeted syllables’ presynaptic
neurons

W(x − x′ ) = W0 + W2

− 1

2 (

x − x′ + bias σ

2 )

e

1

σ 2π

I(x, t) =

n

∑ x=1

1 n

W(x − x′ )m(x′ , t) + I 0

τ

d dt

m(x, t) = − m(x, t) + [I(x, t) − T]+

3.  Local inhibition in HVC

Local inhibition administered to the HVC.

Inhbition = α

1

σ 2π

exp

−

(

1 2 (

2

x − μ

σ )

)

Start

0.125 s

0.25 s

0.375 s

0.5 s

e c a p S e r u t a e F n

i

x e d n

i

n o r u e N

Physical space

Feature space

i

D s t a n c e

Neuron index in Feature Space

Activity proﬁle (bump) in the Feature space (left) and Physical space
(right).

1.  Activity proﬁle in HVC

The width of the activity bump, and thus the duration of transient
neuronal activation, can be decreased to reproduce the brief activity
bursts of HVC neurons.

Start

0.125 s

0.25 s

0.375 s

0.5 s

Activity proﬁle (bump) across time.

0.55 s

0.625 s

0.75 s

0.875 s

1 s

The behavior of the model when we locally inhibit mimicking a Muscimol
injection and the effect on the bump formation and consequently the
song.

Conclusion

We propose that HVC neuronal dynamics may be modelled using the ring
model.

The duration of a syllable can be modiﬁed in response to a perturbed
reward proﬁle and consistent with behavioral data, the change in
duration is speciﬁc to the target syllable.

We derive a new prediction from the model. Following local muscimol
(GABAa agonist) injection in HVC, in contrast to the synﬁre chain, a
perturbation in the initial phase of the pattern formation would delay
song initiation, but singing would be sustained.

Future perspectives:

A spiking network (with adapting LIF neurons) to replicate the  
behaviours acquired from the rate model, i.e 10ms bump width,   learning
and predicition.

References •

Hansel, D., & Sompolinsky, H. (1998). 13 Modeling Feature Selectivity in
Local Cortical Circuits. 69. Ali F Pehlevan C and Olveczky. Nat Commun
9, 977, 2018. Williams, R. J. (1992). Machine Learning, 8(3).

• •

• •

• •

Zhang, K. (1996). Journal of Neuroscience, 16(6). Mauk, M. D., &
Buonomano, D. V. (2004). Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27(1).
Hahnloser, R., Kozhevnikov, A. & Fee, M. Nature 419,(2002) Brainard, M.
S., & Doupe, A. J. (2002). Nature, 417(6886).

 


