The adaptive value of probability distortion and
risk-seeking in macaques’ decision-making
Aurélien Nioche, Nicolas P. Rougier, Marc Deffains, Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde,

Sébastien Ballesta, Thomas Boraud

To cite this version:

Aurélien Nioche, Nicolas P. Rougier, Marc Deffains, Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde, Sébastien Ballesta,
et al.. The adaptive value of probability distortion and risk-seeking in macaques’ decision-making.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2021, 376 (1819), pp.20190668.
￿10.1098/rstb.2019.0668￿. ￿hal-03005035v2￿

HAL Id: hal-03005035

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03005035v2

Submitted on 25 Mar 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

The adaptive value of probability distortion and risk-seeking in
macaques’ decision-making

A. Nioche1, †, N.P. Rougier2,3,4,5, †, M. Deﬀains3,4, S. Bourgeois-Gironde6,7,8, S.
Ballesta9,10, ‡, T. Boraud3,4,11, ‡, \*

(1) Department of Communications and Networking, Aalto University, Finland,
(2) Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 33405 Talence, France; (3) Institut des Maladies
Neurodégénératives, Université de Bordeaux, 33000 Bordeaux, France; (4) In-
stitut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, CNRS, UMR 5293, 33000 Bordeaux,
France; (5) LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, 33405
Talence, France; (6) Laboratoire d’Economie Mathématique et de Microéconomie
Appliquée, Université Panthéon-Assas, 75006 Paris, France; (7) Institut Jean
Nicod, Département d’Etudes Cognitives, ENS, EHESS, PSL Research Uni-
versity, 75005 Paris, France; (8) Institut Jean Nicod, CNRS, UMR 8129; (9)
Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives et Adaptatives, UMR 7364, 67000
Strasbourg, France; (10) Centre de Primatologie de l’Université de Strasbourg,
67207 Niederhausbergen, France. (11) Centre Expert Parkinson, CHU Bordeaux,
33000 Bordeaux, France.

† These authors have contributed equally to this work.
‡ These authors also have contributed equally to this work.
\* Corresponding author: thomas.boraud@u-bordeaux.fr

Keywords: Genetic algorithm, Cognitive biases, Monkey, Autonomous Cogni-
tive Testing, Experimental economics

Abstract

In humans, the attitude toward risk is not neutral and is dissimilar between bets
involving gains and bets involving losses. The existence and prevalence of these
decision features in non-human primates are unclear. In addition, only a few
studies have tried to simulate the evolution of agents based on their attitude
toward risk. Therefore, we still ignore to which extent Prospect theory’s claims
are evolutionary rooted. To shed light on this issue, we collected data in 9
macaques that performed bets involving gains or losses. We conﬁrmed that
their overall behaviour is coherent with Prospect theory’s claims. In parallel,
we used a genetic algorithm to simulate the evolution of a population of agents
across several generations. We showed that the algorithm selects progressively
agents that exhibit risk-seeking and an inverted S-shape distorted perception of
probability. We compared these two results and found that monkeys’ attitude
toward risk when facing losses only is congruent with the simulation. This
result is consistent with the idea that gambling in the loss domain is analogous
to deciding in a context of life-threatening challenges where a certain level of
risk-seeking behaviours and probability distortions may be adaptive.

1

Introduction

Making decisions with uncertain outcomes leads to solving a trade-oﬀ. A decision-
maker’s attitude towards risk depends on his/her capacity to value quantities
and perceive probabilities. Prospect theory oﬀers a framework to deﬁne this
attitude toward risk that relies on two key concepts: (i) choices are performed
according to a reference point with respect to which expected gains and losses
are contrasted; the evaluation of quantities is captured by the shape of the utility
function and reference-dependence entails risk aversion in the domain of gains
(concave utility function) and risk-seeking in the domain of losses (convex utility
function). (ii) The perception of the probabilities of the outcomes, described by
the shape of the probability weighting function, is non-linear.

An increasing number of studies have tackled the biological relevance of Prospect
Theory claims [1–7]. In the domain of gains, risk aversion has been reported in
several taxa, including rodents [8], birds [9], insects [10] and plants [11]. In apes
and monkeys, a variable level of risk-seeking behaviour has been observed [12]
and only few studies [13,14] reported risk aversion (see [15], published in the
same theme issue, for an exhaustive review of the literature in rhesus monkey
[macaca mulatta]). Attitude toward risk in losses has seldom been reported in
independent studies [15]. Prospect theory’s claim of an asymmetry risk-aversion
for gains/risk-seeking for losses per se has been assessed speciﬁcally in few studies
[15]. An asymmetry similar to the one observed in humans has been reported
in capuchins [16] and in Rhesus macaque [17] but other studies have not found
any asymmetry for the latter [15]. Interestingly, this absence of asymmetry has
also been reported in rodents [8]. Overall, these observed variability in primates’
attitude toward risk can be partly explained by contextual factors or sampling
eﬀect [18–21].

Concerning probability distortion, the picture seems clearer. Rhesus and rats, for
instance, perceive rare events as more probable than events that have a higher
probability to occur and vice-versa [8,17,22,23]. This consistency across species,
despite individual variability, possibly implies that probability distortion is likely
to be anchored at a basic neurobiological level [24,25], but more data need to be
collected.

The patchy nature of the data collected up to now, concerning both the shape of
the utility and probability functions in primates, calls for more comprehensive
studies that assess the whole span of Prospect theory in larger populations
in order to assess both intraindividual and interindividual variability, in more
ecological conditions.

In addition, little is known about the adaptive value of the shape of the probability
weighting function and the asymmetry of the utility function [26].

The goal of this study is therefore threefold: (i) to conﬁrm the data previously
collected with two rhesus macaques [17] using a larger number of animals, in
more ecologically-valid conditions (i.e. semi-free ranging Tonkean macaques
exposed to autonomous learning and testing devices); (ii) to address the adaptive

2

value of the non-linearity of the utility and probability weighting function using
a genetic algorithm-based simulation and (iii) to compare the above two ﬁndings.

Materials and Methods

Ethics

Experiments were conducted at the Centre de Primatologie (CdP) de l’Université
de Strasbourg, (Niederhausbergen, France; LNCA UMR-7364) and Institut des
Maladies Neurodegeneratives (IMN, CNRS, UMR-5293, University of Bordeaux,
Bordeaux). At the University of Strasbourg, experiments were approved by the
ethical committee of the Primate Centre of the University of Strasbourg (CdP),
which is authorized to house non-human primates (registration n°B6732636).
The research further complied with the EU Directive 2010/63/EU for animal
experiments. At the IMN, experimental procedures were performed in accordance
with the Council Directive of 2010 (2010/63/EU) of the European Community
and the National Institute of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals. The protocol received agreement from the Ethical Committee for
Animal Research CE50 (registration n°C33063268).

Subjects

At the University of Strasbourg, we collected data on one social group of Tonkean
macaques (Macaca tonkeana), housed at the CdP. Animals lived in semi-free
ranging conditions in a wooded park of 3788m2 with permanent access to an
indoor-outdoor shelter (2,5x7.5m - 2x4m). The group included 23 individuals
with even sex ratio among adults, which is comparable to the composition of
wild groups [27]. All subjects have research experiences in cognitive testing using
touchscreens. Amongst the 23 individuals, 14 were involved in this current study,
however only 7 were suﬃciently trained or performed our economic task without
a signiﬁcant side bias (<80%) to be included in this report. The species Macaca
tonkeana is a member of a group of closely-related Sulawesi macaque species, all
living in multi-male and multi-female egalitarian and highly tolerant societies
[28,29]. Indeed, compared to other species of macaques, Sulawesi macaques
social interactions are more complex and more inﬂuenced by friendships than
by dominance and kinships [29–33]. However, the non-social cognition skills of
Tonkean macaques seem to be comparable to those observed in other species of
macaques [34]. Unfortunately, due to demographic heterogeneity and small size
of the experimental population for each species (see Table S1), the comparison
of economic decisions of Tonkean macaques with rhesus monkeys is beyond the
scope of this actual study. However, we believe that the experimental methods
reported here are particularly adapted to the future study of potential variations
in economic decision-making in diﬀerent species of primates. Water was provided
ad libitum and monkeys were fed with commercial primate pellets twice a day
and received fresh fruit and vegetables once a week. At the IMN, the study was
performed on two female Rhesus macaques: Hav (born in 2012) and Gla (born
in 2011). Animals were housed in the animal facility of the IMN under standard
conditions (a 12h light/dark cycle with the light on from 7 am to 7 pm; humidity

3

at 60%, temperature 22±2°C). During the time of the experiment, animals had
controlled access to water ﬁve days per week. They were fed with commercial
primate pellets once a day, and received fresh fruit and vegetables once a week.
The 9 animals (5 males and 4 females) that composed the ﬁnal experimental
cohort weighed 10±3.1 kg and were 6.8±2 years old.

Data collection

At the University of Strasbourg, data were collected using four Machines for
Automated Learning and Testing (MALT), which were directly accessible to the
monkeys from their living environment (Fig1a,b). Several cognitive tasks were
available to the macaques at the MALT presented via a touchscreen interface
[35]. Each MALT was accessible freely 24/7, except for two-hours cleaning
and reﬁll sessions, at least once a week. MALT allows automatic identiﬁcation
of each subject using an RFID dual-detection system [36]. For that purpose,
subjects were all equipped with two RFID microchips (UNO MICRO ID / 12,
ISO Transponder 2.12 \* 12mm), injected into each forearm during the macaques’
veterinary health check under appropriate anaesthesia, to individually identify
them when using MALT (Fig1bc). At the IMN, data were daily collected
(~1h/session, ~5 sessions/week). During each session, animals were seated in a
primate restraint chair located in a dark room equipped with a video monitoring
system and faced a touchscreen on which the task was displayed (Fig1d). A
resting bar was mounted in the lower part of the chair at waist level to accurately
measure arm-reaching movement parameters. The behavioural and video data
were stored on a separate computer located outside the room for further analysis.

Each monkey performed between 11,681 and 51,853 trials. Some semi-free
ranging subjects (Tonkeans) were not performing the task optimally and adopted
alternative response strategies. Indeed, ﬁve tested individuals chose the target on
one side in more than 80% of the cases (in lotteries involving either gains or losses)
and were consequently not included in this study. Two other individuals were
also not considered because they performed less than 2,000 trials. Concerning
the Rhesus monkeys, we recorded overall 54904 trials of which 39853 (72.59%)
had already been used for a previous publication [17].

Task

The task is adapted from Nioche et al. [17], without any major change and is
shown in Fig2.

Lottery: We consider simple lotteries L ∈ L, that can be deﬁned as a tuple (x, p),
such that if L = (x, p), it yields the outcome x ∈ R, with probability p ∈ [0, 1]
and 0 with probability 1 − p. For all trials, the probability of receiving (losing)
tokens is drawn from the set p ∈ {0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.00}.

Choice: Each choice has to be made between two lotteries L1 = (x1 p1) and
L2 = (x2 p2) .

Rewards: The monkey starts each trial with 3 tokens and can gain up to 3 tokens
and lose up to 3 tokens. At the end of the trial, the monkey would be rewarded

4

with liquid reward proportional to the tokens earned (between 0 and 6 tokens
at the end of each trial). At the University of Strasbourg, monkeys could be
rewarded with diluted syrup (1/10; 1 token of reward corresponds to .25 mL of
liquid reward; Fig2) and at the IMN, with diluted apple sauce (1/3, 1 token
corresponds to .1 mL of liquid reward).

Experimental paradigm

At the beginning of the trial, a gauge with 3 tokens is displayed (Fig2bc). In
Bordeaux, the monkey has to grasp a grip (i.e. resting bar at waist level) for a
short duration that varies randomly in a range from trial to trial (150 ~ 300 ms)
to ensure that the monkey can not anticipate the stimuli display. If the monkey
does not hold the grip long enough, the trial is considered to be failed and an
error is raised. If an error is raised, the screen turns to black, and the monkey
has to wait 2,000 ms for the beginning of the next trial. In case the monkey
holds the grip for the required amount of time, two circles representing two
lotteries appear on the screen. The monkey has 2,000 ms to decide which lottery
to choose. If the monkey does not choose within the allotted decision time, an
error is raised. Once one lottery is selected by touching the corresponding circle,
the other circle disappears. The monkey has 5,000 ms to return its hand to the
grip (otherwise, an error is raised). Once the monkey returns its hand to the
grip, the outcome is determined based on the probabilities shown in the two
slices of the chosen circle. The amount of reward (loss) is indicated to the animal
by the disappearance of the slice corresponding to the non-occurring output.
The gauge is ﬁlled (emptied) by the amount earned (forfeited), one token at
the time. The time of the ﬁlling animation is 1,500 ms. The inter-trial interval
varied randomly between 150 and 300 ms.

At the University of Strasbourg, similar experiments were performed using touch-
screens only. The experiment started with a central coloured square. Directly
(25 ms) after the subject touched this cue, two circles representing two lotteries
appeared on the screen. The animal had 15,000 ms to decide which lottery
to choose. After making a choice by touching one of the two circles the other
circle disappeared. On the remaining circle, the outcome was determined based
on the probabilities shown in the two slices of the chosen circle. The gauge
ﬁlled (emptied) by the amount earned (forfeited), all tokens at the time. During
reward delivery, auditory feedback (bell sound) was played for each token earned
by the subject. The gauge and tokens stayed on the screen for 8,000 ms plus a
500 ms intertrial interval where the screen was left black.

Modelling of monkeys’ decisions

We characterize the monkeys’ decision-making using a model based on the
Prospect Theory [26,37], similar to the one used in Nioche et al. [17].

Probability weighting function and probability distortion. Following Prelec [38]
the subjective probability perception is deﬁned as:

w(p) = e−(− ln p)α

(1)

5

with p ∈ (0, 1] the actual probability, and with α ∈ (0, ∞), a free parameter
indicating the distortion of the probability perception. We assume that w(0) = 0.
For α ∈ (0, 1), the closer α is to zero, the more the small probabilities are
overestimated, and the large probabilities underestimated. For α = 1, the
subjective probabilities are the same as the objective probabilities. For α ∈ (1, ∞),
the higher α, the more the small probabilities are underestimated, and the large
probabilities overestimated.

Utility function and risk aversion. The utility of a normalized outcome x ∈ [−1, 1]
is deﬁned as:

u(x) =






x1−β
−|x|1+β
0

if x > 0,
if x < 0,
otherwise.

(2)

with β ∈ R a free parameter describing the risk-aversion of the decision-maker
[39]. If β is positive, u00 is negative, indicating risk-averse preferences [40], if β
is negative, u00 is positive, indicating risk-seeking preferences, if β is equal to 0,
∀x : u(x) = x and u00(x) = 0, indicating risk-neutral preferences.

Subjective expected utility and side bias. The subjective expected utility of a
lottery L is given by:

SEU (L = (x, p)) =






w(p)u(x) − γ
w(p)u(x) + γ
w(p)u(x)

if γ < 0 and L is on the left,
if γ > 0 and L is on the right,
otherwise.

(3)

with γ ∈ R, a free parameter describing to which extent the decision-maker is
biased towards one side. If γ = 0, the decision-maker is not biased. Otherwise,
the higher γ, the more he is biased towards the right, the lower γ, the more he
is biased towards the left.

Choice probability and stochasticity. We also assume that action selection is
probabilistic: the option that has the highest subjective utility is chosen only with
a probability greater than the other options, and not with certainty. We model
this stochasticity with a classic softmax function [41] such as the probability of
choosing the lottery Li is given by:

p(choice = Li) =

1

1 + e−

SEU (Li)−SEU (Lj )
λ

(4)

with Lj the alternative option, and λ ∈ (0, ∞) a free parameter describing
to which extent decision-making is stochastic. The higher λ, the more the
decision-making is stochastic.

Data analysis

We will consider separately the choices involving only potential gains (xi∈1,2 > 0)
and only potential losses (xi∈1,2 < 0). Furthermore, we will distinguish two
groups of choices.

6

Group 1. There is a better response regardless of the risk attitude of the decision-
maker: there is i, j ∈ {1, 2} s.t. pi ≥ pj and xi > xj, or pi > pj and xi ≥ xj,
(30 diﬀerent pairs of lotteries for gains, 30 for losses ignoring the order/side of
presentation—60 otherwise);

Group 2. A trade-oﬀ between risk and potential gain/loss has to be done: there
is i, j ∈ {1, 2} s.t. pi > pj and xi < xj (18 diﬀerent pairs of lotteries for gains,
18 for losses ignoring the order/side of presentation---36 otherwise).

The choices from Group 1 are used as control and choices from Group2 to assess
attitude towards risk.

Control 1: Performance assessment. Lottery pairs with a better response (Group
1) are used to assess the monkeys’ performance. We consider speciﬁcally the
cases where it exists i, j ∈ {1, 2} s.t.:

• [Same p] pi = pj but xi > xj in order to assess the discrimination of the
quantities (12 diﬀerent pairs of lotteries for gains, 12 for losses ignoring
the order/side of presentation—24 otherwise);

• [Same x] xi = xj but pi > pj in order to assess the discrimination of the
probabilities (18 diﬀerent pairs of lotteries for gains, 18 for losses ignoring
the order/side of presentation—36 otherwise).

We model the probability of choosing the right option depending on the diﬀerence
of expected values using an ordinary sigmoid function:
1 + e−k(∆−x0)(cid:17)

p(∆) = 1/

(5)

(cid:16)

with ∆ the diﬀerence of expected values between the lottery on the right and
the lottery on the left, k the slope parameter, and x0 the intercept parameter.
We used a Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (SciPy library) to optimize the
parameters.

Control 2: Consideration of the diﬀerence between expected values when trading-
oﬀ between quantity and probability. Results for lottery pairs with a trade-oﬀ
between quantity and probability (Group 2) are used to check if the frequency
with which the riskiest option is chosen is dependent on the diﬀerence between
the expected values of the safest option and of the riskiest option.

We model this relation using an ordinary sigmoid function:

p(∆) = 1/

(cid:16)

1 + e−k(∆−x0)(cid:17)

(6)

with ∆ the diﬀerence of expected values between the riskiest lottery and the
safest lottery, k the slope parameter, and x0 the intercept parameter. We used a
Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (SciPy library) to optimize the parameters.

Assessment of the attitude towards risk. The choices from Group 2 are used to
characterize the attitude toward risk. To this end, separately for each monkey

7

and for choices involving potential losses and for choices involving potential
gains, we optimize the free parameters of our model (θ = {α, β, γ, λ}), using
an SLSQP optimization algorithm [42] (Scipy Library), in order to maximize
the likelihood of the data given the model. More precisely, the log-likelihood is
estimated as follows:

ln L(O | θ) =

ln p(oi | θ)

(7)

|O|
X

i

for θ = {α, β, γ, λ} a set of parameter values, and with O the set of observation
under consideration, p the probability according to our decision-making model
of making the choice oi ∈ O given θ.

To assess the stability of the ﬁt, we binned the trials by chunks of 200 trials by
chronological order for each monkey, and optimize separately for each chunk the
free parameters of the model.

Simulations

The simulation is based on a genetic algorithm [43]. We consider a set L =
{l1, ...lNL} of lotteries where each lottery l1 is described by a probability pi =
i/NL of reward and an associated reward xi = 1/pi such that the expected value
of each lottery is equal to 1. We consider a set A = {a1, ..., aNA } of agents where
each agent ak is fully described by a couple of parameters (αk, βk). When asked
to choose between lotteries li and lj, the choice of agent ak is:

choice(ak, li, lj) =

(
i
j

if wαk (pi)uβk (xi) > wαk (pj)uβk (xj)
otherwise

(8)

with wα : [0, 1] → [0, 1], the probability weighting function w described above
with a value of distortion parameter equal to α and uβ : R → R, the utility
function u described above with risk aversion parameter equal to β.

The initial population A0 is built from a set of parameters α and β being uniformly
drawn from [αmin, αmax] × [βmin, βmax] such that we have a0

k = {αk, βk}.

At each epoch, each agent completes a set of NT trials. Each trial is composed of
two lotteries randomly and uniformly drawn for the set L. Individual gains are
computed according to the agent’s choices, and a proportion of the best scorers
is selected using a selection rate γ that may vary depending on the simulation
(see results section). The next generation is computed by iteratively selecting
two random parents among the selected agents and by computing the linear
interpolation of their respective parameters (α and β) such as to generate two
i and an agent an
oﬀsprings. More precisely, considering an agent an
j at epoch n,
we generate two new agents an+1
k+1 using a random and uniform factor
λ ∈]0, ε[ (ε being the mixture rate) such that:

and an+1

k

an+1
k = (λαn
an+1
k+1 = ((1 − λ)αn

i + (1 − λ)αn
j + λαn

j , λβn
i , (1 − λ)βn

i + (1 − λ)βn
j )
j + λβn
i )

(9)

8

The procedure is iterated until we reach a population whose size is the same
as the initial population. After this new population has been generated, we
apply a mutation of a small proportion of the new agents using a mutation rate
δ such that δ × NA agents beneﬁt from a random mutation. This mutation
consists of replacing the agent’s set of parameters by values randomly drawn
from [αmin, αmax] × [βmin, βmax]. The whole procedure is iterated for a ﬁxed
number of epochs NE.

Statistics

To compare measures, we used a Wilcoxon signed-rank (for paired data) and
rank-sum test (for independent data) with p < 0.05. We also consider that
monkeys’ behaviours were signiﬁcantly biased based on the 95% conﬁdence
intervals given by the best ﬁt parameter value of the model.

Results

Monkeys’ attitude toward risk

We analysed the results of 9 macaques monkeys that performed a total of 256 976
trials (28 553±12 609 per subject). Each trial consisted of a bet involving either
gains or losses. We assessed the performance of the monkeys, by evaluating how
they consider the diﬀerence of expected value between the available options. On
average, monkeys were sensible to the diﬀerence of expected value between the two
options. Supplementary section provides details about each individual behaviour
(FigS1-S3 and Table S1-S8). Monkeys were sensible to the diﬀerence of
expected value between the two options when probabilities were equal but
amounts diﬀer (Fig3a,d) for 8/9 individuals in the gain domain and 7/9 in the
loss domain (95% conﬁdence intervals of the best ﬁt parameter value). Monkeys
were also sensible to options when amounts were equal but probability diﬀers
(Fig3b,e) for 9/9 subjects in the gain and the loss domains and when there
is a trading-oﬀ between quantity and probability (Fig3c,f ), for 9/9 and 6/9
individuals for the gain and the loss domain, respectively.

Based on the Prospect theory [26,37], we characterize the probability weighting
function (i.e. subjective perception of probabilities), the utility function (i.e.
subjective valuation of the rewards), the stochasticity in choice (i.e. to which
extent choices reﬂect subjective expected utilities), and the side bias for each
individual. On average, the best-ﬁt values of the risk aversion parameter of
the macaques’ utility functions are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for gains and losses
(Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.0039). The recovered utility functions are
respectively concave in the gains domain, indicating risk-averse preferences
(Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.02, Fig4a) and convex in the losses domain,
indicating risk-seeking preferences (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.0039, Fig4d),
reproducing the known asymmetry. Monkeys also overweight small probabilities
both in the losses and gains domains (Fig4b,e; Wilcoxon signed-rank test, both
p=0.0039). This distortion is slightly more pronounced for losses than gains but
did not reach a signiﬁcant threshold (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.098). The
steepness of the softmax function that ﬁt their choice probabilities given the

9

subjective expected utilities (Fig4e,f ) was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between
the gain and the loss domain (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.36). The side bias
in their decisions was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the gain and the loss
domain (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.91). Supplementary section provides
details about each individual (FigS4-S5).

Evolution of attitude toward risk in a population of artiﬁcial agents

Unless stated otherwise, we use the parameters given in Table 1 for all the
simulations. The initial and ﬁnal populations are respectively depicted in
Fig5a,b and Fig5c,d. The thick black lines indicate the mean probability
weighting function (Fig5c) and the mean utility function (Fig5d) over the
whole population at the end of the selection process.

Overall, Fig5 reveals that more than 95% of the agents in the ﬁnal population
tend to overestimate low probabilities and under-estimate high probabilities
(see FigS6c). It also appears that more than 95% of the agents in the ﬁnal
population have a convex utility function, indicating risk-seeking behaviour (see
FigS6d).

The mean gain of a subset of the artiﬁcial agents depending on the shapes on
their probability weighting and utility functions is depicted in Fig6. The mean
gain of best individuals is sometimes better than the expected value, allowing
the selection process to be eﬃcient. As expected, an overestimation of small
probabilities and underestimation of high probabilities (β = 0.6) leads to higher
gains with only a marginal inﬂuence of the utility. When there is no distortion of
probabilities (β = 1.0), only the utility function inﬂuences the mean gain of the
luckiest agents. For an underestimation of small probabilities and overestimation
of high probabilities (β = 1.4), the inﬂuence of the utility function is negligible.

The exact shape of the ﬁnal population’s functions is dependent on the selection
rate, mutation rate and mixture rate as shown in Fig7. However, the inﬂuence
of the mutation rate is small, as is the inﬂuence of the mixture rate, and for
neighbouring values of the selection rate (between 5% and 30%), the shapes of the
curves remain similar to the ones shown in Fig5. Though, if the selection rate is
very large (45% or higher), the shapes of the curves are inverted: the probability
weighting function would be S-shaped (instead of inverted S-shaped), indicating
a low probabilities underestimation and a high probabilities overestimation, and
the utility function would be convex, indicating risk-averse preferences. Further
analysis of the evolution and inﬂuence of parameters on the distribution of the
ﬁnal population are provided in Figures S7-13.

Comparison between monkeys’ and agents’ populations

We compared the observations made in monkeys and the observations made in
artiﬁcial agents. Fig8a,b summarizes the results of this analysis.

As the exact characteristics of the ﬁnal population depend on the selection
rate, we report statistical results for a selection parameter included in the set
{0.05, 0.1, . . . , 0.35}, that is values neighbouring the one used for the results

10

presented in Fig5 (±0.15). The probability weighting function has an inverted
S-shape both in populations of monkeys and selected artiﬁcial agents. The values
of the probability distortion parameter between the populations of monkeys and
selected artiﬁcial agents are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for gains (Fig8b, Wilcoxon
rank-sum, all p>0.05, common language eﬀect size [44], f = [0.32 , 0.58]) and
less robustly for losses (Fig8b, Wilcoxon rank-sum, for γ ∈ [0.05, 0.2], all p>0.05,
f = [0.49, 0.63] and for γ ∈ [0.25, 0.35], all p<0.05, f = [0.12, 0.29]). On the other
hand, the values of the risk aversion parameter are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for gains
(Fig8b, Wilcoxon rank-sum, all p<0.001, f = [0.91, 1]) and, to a lesser extent,
for losses (Fig8b, Wilcoxon rank-sum, all p < 0.1, f = [0.12, 0.32]), although
the values observed for monkeys in the losses and artiﬁcial agents lead both to
risk-seeking preferences (convexity of the utility function).

Discussion

We measured probability distortion and risk aversion in nine macaque monkeys
of diﬀerent ages and genders, belonging to two species, by using a similar task in
diﬀerent experimental conditions. We found that, overall, monkeys showed an
inverted S-shape probability distortion pattern. In addition, on average, animals
were respectively risk-averse for gains and risk-seeking for losses, conﬁrming an
asymmetry of treatment between gains and losses as we previously described [17].
Our conclusions are drawn from a dataset that includes a reasonable number
of subjects and most of them voluntarily performed the task in unconstrained
environments, providing ecological validity to our ﬁndings. Our results therefore
reliably reproduce in two species of non-human primates the classical pattern
of the Prospect theory found in humans [45]. It is still worth noting that a
substantial level of heterogeneity has been reported in the attitude of monkeys
and humans towards risk [21] (for more information see [15] published in this
special issue). Many confounding factors have been considered as the source
of this heterogeneity, such as the amount or the nature of rewards, the kind of
behavioural task or even the temporal organization of trials within a given task.
Further research is needed to better understand the inﬂuence of these factors on
primates’ decision-making.

Eﬃciency in foraging and reproduction has been optimized by natural selection
as individuals that followed sub-optimal strategies lost out to competitors [46,47].
The classical inverted S-shape proﬁle of the probability weighting function has
been described in many diﬀerent species, and it may be a ubiquitous characteristic
of decision-making of living organisms [8,22,23]. One can thus speculate that
such decisional strategy may be adaptive. The evolutionary advantages of the
non-linearity of the probability weighting and utility functions remain debated
[1–7]. Our results, that bring together real-life and simulation data, oﬀer new
insights into this issue.

Indeed, to assess if these cognitive biases may confer an evolutionary advantage at
the population level, we ran a simulation that allowed agents to freely compete
and select the decision strategies that had the best ﬁtness. The results of
this simulation show that the ﬁnal population exhibits an inverted S-shaped

11

probability weighting function and a convex utility function. This indicates that
the selected decision-makers are those that have a preference for risk (i.e. the
convexity of the utility function) while overestimating the small probabilities
and underestimating the high probabilities (i.e. the inverted S-shape of the
probability weighting function). Hence, in a context where the total number
of choices is limited, and the expected value is constant between the options,
the selection process promotes the lucky gamblers that are biased towards the
‘high-stake’ bets (small probability and large reward). The strategy with the
better ﬁtness in our simulation is therefore congruent with the behavioural
pattern of the monkeys’ behaviour in losses.

Gambling in the loss domain can be arguably considered analogous to deciding
in a context of life-threatening challenges (e.g. predation avoidance, social
challenges). Cognitive adaptation in humans seems to support this hypothesis
[48]. For instance, loss cues attracted more attentional resources than gain cues
[49,50]. In real-life, suboptimal decision-making in the gains domain may thus
not lead to consequences as dramatic as in the losses domain. Hence, one can
speculate that diﬀerent levels of selective pressure could have been applied to
the biological mechanisms responsible for decision-making under risk in the gain
and the loss domains, then fostering an asymmetry of treatment.

Our simulation did not capture this known asymmetry of treatment between
gains and losses in primates [26,37]. This was expected because, for agents
in the simulation, gains and losses were diﬀerentiated only by their polarity.
However, the mean decisional strategy adopted by monkeys in the losses’ domain
was the closest to the selected behaviors of agents (both risk seeking). Several
proposals may help to interpret this result. First, satiety is known to inﬂuence
economic decisions [51–54]. In real-life, losses could be arguably inﬁnite (i.e.
losing social status, territories, physical integrity or even facing death) whereas
accumulation of goods is usually limited by time and/or space (e.g.
limited
accumulation of goods or satiety during foraging). These features were not
implemented in the simulation and may be good candidates to better explain the
known asymmetry of treatment between gains and losses. Second, it has been
noted that the emotional state of subjects and/or social context of decisions can
inﬂuence attitude toward risk and loss aversion [19,55,56]. Our simulations did
not consider these other important features of biological agents. But despite
these limits, we found that the ﬁnal population of agents exhibit distorted
probability perception and non-linear utility function, thus showing that these
behavioural strategies can be adaptive in a given context of decision-making.
In conclusion, our study shows that integrating simulation and real-life data
provides new insights about the evolutionary roots of cognitive biases, therefore
reassessing the biological dimension of the decision theory.

12

References

1. Okasha S. 2007 Rational Choice, Risk Aversion, and Evolution. The Journal
of Philosophy 104, 217–235.

2. McDermott R, Fowler JH, Smirnov O. 2008 On the Evolutionary Ori-
gin of Prospect Theory Preferences. The Journal of Politics 70, 335–350.
(doi:10.1017/S0022381608080341)

3. Houston AI, Fawcett TW, Mallpress DEW, McNamara JM. 2014 Clarifying the
relationship between prospect theory and risk-sensitive foraging theory. Evolution
and Human Behavior 35, 502–507. (doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2014.06.010)

4. Rieger MO. 2014 Evolutionary stability of prospect theory preferences. Journal
of Mathematical Economics 50, 1–11. (doi:10.1016/j.jmateco.2013.11.002)

5. Hintze A, Olson RS, Adami C, Hertwig R. 2015 Risk sensitivity as an
evolutionary adaptation. Sci Rep 5, 8242. (doi:10.1038/srep08242)

6. Mallpress DEW, Fawcett TW, Houston AI, McNamara JM. 2015 Risk attitudes
in a changing environment: An evolutionary model of the fourfold pattern of
risk preferences. Psychological Review 122, 364–375. (doi:10.1037/a0038970)

7.
Addessi E, Beran MJ, Bourgeois-Gironde S, Brosnan SF, Leca J-
B. 2020 Are the roots of human economic systems shared with non-
human primates?
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 109, 1–15.
(doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.12.026)

8. Constantinople CM, Piet AT, Brody CD. 2019 An Analysis of Decision under
Risk in Rats. Current Biology 29, 2066-2074.e5. (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.013)

Caraco T. 1981 Energy budgets, risk and foraging preferences in
Behav Ecol Sociobiol 8, 213–217.

9.
dark-eyed juncos (Junco hyemalis).
(doi:10.1007/BF00299833)

10. Harder LD, Real LA. 1987 Why are Bumble Bees Risk Averse? Ecology 68,
1104–1108. (doi:10.2307/1938384)

11. Dener E, Kacelnik A, Shemesh H. 2016 Pea Plants Show Risk Sensitivity.
Current Biology 26, 1763–1767. (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.05.008)

12. Sayers K, Menzel CR. 2017 Risk sensitivity, phylogenetic reconstruction, and
four chimpanzees. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 71, 26. (doi:10.1007/s00265-016-2234-8)

13. Heilbronner SR, Rosati AG, Stevens JR, Hare B, Hauser MD. 2008 A fruit
in the hand or two in the bush? Divergent risk preferences in chimpanzees and
bonobos. Biol. Lett. 4, 246–249. (doi:10.1098/rsbl.2008.0081)

14. Eisenreich BR, Hayden BY, Zimmermann J. 2019 Macaques are risk-averse
in a freely moving foraging task. Sci Rep 9, 15091. (doi:10.1038/s41598-019-
51442-z)

13

15. Garcia B, Cerrotti F, Palminteri S. 2020 The description-experience gap:
a challenge for the neuroeconomics of decision-making under uncertainty.
(doi:10.31234/osf.io/9s23f)

16. Lakshminarayanan VR, Chen MK, Santos LR. 2011 The evolution of
decision-making under risk: Framing eﬀects in monkey risk preferences. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology 47, 689–693. (doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2010.12.011)

17. Nioche A, Bourgeois-Gironde S, Boraud T. 2019 An asymmetry of treatment
between lotteries involving gains and losses in rhesus monkeys. Sci Rep 9, 10441.
(doi:10.1038/s41598-019-46975-2)

18. Farashahi S, Azab H, Hayden B, Soltani A. 2018 On the Flexibil-
ity of Basic Risk Attitudes in Monkeys.
38, 4383–4398.
(doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2260-17.2018)

J. Neurosci.

19. Rosati AG, Hare B. 2012 Decision making across social contexts: competition
increases preferences for risk in chimpanzees and bonobos. Animal Behaviour
84, 869–879. (doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2012.07.010)

20. De Petrillo F, Paoletti M, Bellagamba F, Manzi G, Paglieri F, Addessi E.
2020 Contextual factors modulate risk preferences in adult humans. Behavioural
Processes 176, 104137. (doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2020.104137)

21. Harrison GW, Elisabet Rutström E. 2008 Risk Aversion in the Laboratory.
In Risk Aversion in Experiments (eds J C. Cox, G W. Harrison), pp. 41–196.
Emerald Group Publishing Limited. (doi:10.1016/S0193-2306(08)00003-3)

22. Stauﬀer WR, Lak A, Bossaerts P, Schultz W. 2015 Economic Choices
Reveal Probability Distortion in Macaque Monkeys. Journal of Neuroscience
35, 3146–3154. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3653-14.2015)

23. Ferrari-Toniolo S, Bujold PM, Schultz W. 2019 Probability Distortion
Depends on Choice Sequence in Rhesus Monkeys. J. Neurosci. 39, 2915–2929.
(doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1454-18.2018)

24. Tobler PN, Christopoulos GI, O’Doherty JP, Dolan RJ, Schultz W. 2008 Neu-
ronal Distortions of Reward Probability without Choice. Journal of Neuroscience
28, 11703–11711. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2870-08.2008)

25. Wu S-W, Delgado MR, Maloney LT. 2011 The Neural Correlates of
Subjective Utility of Monetary Outcome and Probability Weight in Eco-
nomic and in Motor Decision under Risk.
J. Neurosci. 31, 8822–8831.
(doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0540-11.2011)

26. Tversky A, Kahneman D. 1992 Advances in prospect theory: Cu-
mulative representation of uncertainty.
J Risk Uncertainty 5, 297–323.
(doi:10.1007/BF00122574)

27. Riley EP. 2007 Flexibility in Diet and Activity Patterns of Macaca tonkeana
in Response to Anthropogenic Habitat Alteration. Int J Primatol 28, 107–133.
(doi:10.1007/s10764-006-9104-6)

14

28. Thierry B, Iwaniuk AN, Pellis SM. 2000 The Inﬂuence of Phylogeny on
the Social Behaviour of Macaques (Primates: Cercopithecidae, genus Macaca).
Ethology 106, 713–728.

29. Thierry B, Bynum EL, Baker S, Kinnaird MF, Matsumura S, Muroyama
Y, O’Brien TG, Petit O, Watanabe K. 2000 The Social Repertoire of Sulawesi
Macaques. Primate Research 16, 203–226. (doi:10.2354/psj.16.203)

Petit O, Thierry B. 1994 Aggressive and peaceful

interventions
Animal Behaviour 48, 1427–1436.

30.
in conﬂicts in Tonkean macaques.
(doi:10.1006/anbe.1994.1378)

31. Dobson SD. 2012 Coevolution of Facial Expression and Social Tol-
erance in Macaques.
American Journal of Primatology 74, 229–235.
(doi:10.1002/ajp.21991)

32. Micheletta J, Waller BM. 2012 Friendship aﬀects gaze following in a
tolerant species of macaque, Macaca nigra. Animal Behaviour 83, 459–467.
(doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2011.11.018)

33. Whitehouse J, Meunier H. 2020 An understanding of third-party friendships
in a tolerant macaque. Scientiﬁc Reports 10, 9777. (doi:10.1038/s41598-020-
66407-w)

34. Joly M, Micheletta J, De Marco A, Langermans JA, Sterck EHM, Waller
BM. 2017 Comparing physical and social cognitive skills in macaque species
with diﬀerent degrees of social tolerance. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 284, 20162738. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2016.2738)

35. Fizet J, Rimele A, Pebayle T, Cassel J-C, Kelche C, Meunier H. 2017
An autonomous, automated and mobile device to concurrently assess several
cognitive functions in group-living non-human primates. Neurobiol Learn Mem
145, 45–58. (doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2017.07.013)

36. Pebayle T, Fizet J, Rimele A, Meunier H. 2016 Multitask learning machine
with dual RFID detection.

37. Kahneman D, Tversky A. 1979 Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
under Risk. Econometrica 47, 263–291. (doi:10.2307/1914185)

38. Prelec D. 1998 The Probability Weighting Function. Econometrica 66,
497–527. (doi:10.2307/2998573)

39. Holt CA, Laury SK. 2002 Risk Aversion and Incentive Eﬀects. The American
Economic Review 92, 1644–1655.

40. Von Neumann J, Morgenstern O. 1944 Theory of games and economic
behavior. Princeton, NJ, US: Princeton University Press.

41. Sutton RS, Barto AG. 1998 Reinforcement learning: an introduction. Cam-
bridge, Mass: MIT Press.

15

42. Kraft D. 1988 A Software Package for Sequential Quadratic Programming.
Wiss. Berichtswesen d. DFVLR.

43. Holland JH. 1992 Genetic Algorithms. Sci Am 267, 66–72.
(doi:10.1038/scientiﬁcamerican0792-66)

44. McGraw KO, Wong SP. 1992 A common language eﬀect size statistic.
Psychological Bulletin 111, 361–365. (doi:10.1037/0033-2909.111.2.361)

45. Ruggeri K et al. 2020 Replicating patterns of prospect theory for decision
under risk. Nature Human Behaviour , 1–12. (doi:10.1038/s41562-020-0886-x)

46. Parker GA, Smith JM. 1990 Optimality theory in evolutionary biology.
Nature 348, 27–33. (doi:10.1038/348027a0)

47. Darwin C Burrow, John Wyon. 1859 The origin of species by means of
natural selection or the preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life.
Harmondsworth; New-York; Ringwood: Penguin books.

48. Harinck F, Van Dijk E, Van Beest I, Mersmann P. 2007 When Gains Loom
Larger Than Losses: Reversed Loss Aversion for Small Amounts of Money.
Psychol Sci 18, 1099–1105. (doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.02031.x)

49. Lejarraga T, Schulte-Mecklenbeck M, Pachur T, Hertwig R. 2019 The
attention–aversion gap: how allocation of attention relates to loss aversion. Evolu-
tion and Human Behavior 40, 457–469. (doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2019.05.008)

50. Sheng F, Ramakrishnan A, Seok D, Zhao WJ, Thelaus S, Cen P, Platt ML.
2020 Decomposing loss aversion from gaze allocation and pupil dilation. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 117, 11356–11363. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1919670117)

51. Raghuraman AP, Padoa-Schioppa C. 2014 Integration of Multiple Determi-
nants in the Neuronal Computation of Economic Values. Journal of Neuroscience
34, 11583–11603. (doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1235-14.2014)

52. Sheng CL. 1989 Some quantitative concepts of value and utility from a
utilitarian point of view. Theor Decis 26, 175–195. (doi:10.1007/BF00159225)

53. Yamada H, Tymula A, Louie K, Glimcher PW. 2013 Thirst-dependent
risk preferences in monkeys identify a primitive form of wealth. PNAS 110,
15788–15793. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1308718110)

54. Yamada H. 2017 Hunger enhances consistent economic choices in non-human
primates. Sci Rep 7, 2394. (doi:10.1038/s41598-017-02417-5)

55. Druckman JN, McDermott R. 2008 Emotion and the Framing of Risky
Choice. Polit Behav 30, 297–321. (doi:10.1007/s11109-008-9056-y)

56. Campos-Vazquez RM, Cuilty E. 2014 The role of emotions on risk aversion: A
Prospect Theory experiment. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics
50, 1–9. (doi:10.1016/j.socec.2014.01.001)

16

Data availability

The data necessary to reproduce the analyses presented in this article are provided
at https://github.com/aureliennioche/EvoProspect.

Code availability

The code necessary to reproduce the simulations and the analyses presented in
this article is provided at https://github.com/aureliennioche/EvoProspect.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Silabe and the University of Strasbourg for expert animal
care of the Tonkean colony and ﬁnancial support. We thank Hélène Meunier for
the initial training of the Tonkean colony on a touchscreen interface and Adam
Rimele for technical support and data management. The rhesus macaques were
housed in the centre Paul Broca Nouvelle Aquitaine, thanks to Labex BRAIN
ﬁnancial support. Hugues Orignac and Tho-Hai N’Guyen take care of them with
great skills. TB and MD are supported by the CNRS, SB by the University of
Strasbourg, SBG by the University of Panthéon-Assas, NR by Inria and AN by
the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-16-CE38-0003), the Ministère de la
Recherche et de la Technologie (French ministry for research and technology),
Sorbonne Université and Aalto University. The funders had no role in study
design, data collection, and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work
for publication.

Author Contributions

AN, MD, SB performed the experiments in monkeys; AN, NR performed the
simulations; AN, NR and SB performed the data analysis; AN, NR, MD, SBG,
SB, and TB designed the study and co-wrote the manuscript.

Competing Interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

17

Figure 1: (a,b) Four MALTs were set up in a shelter placed inside the macaques’
wooded park and behavioural tasks similar to the ones used in Nioche et al.
[17] were presented via a touchscreen interface. Correct trials are rewarded
with diluted syrups according to the probability associated with the choice. (c)
Screenshot from the control video streaming while a subject was performing a
trial. The pattern of each slice represents the number of tokens earned or lost
(see Methods). (d) Experimental device for rhesus monkeys at the IMN. The
monkey sat in a primate restraint chair positioned 20 cm from a touchscreen
installed in an electrically isolated dark room. A resting bar was mounted on the
lower part of the chair at waist level. A tube positioned directly in front of the
monkey’s mouth dispensed small amounts of apple sauce as a reward. Task/video
monitoring and data acquisition were performed by a separate computer located
outside the dark room.

18

abcDark roomApple sauceCameraComputerTouchscreenRestingbarRestraintchairdFigure 2: (a) The orientation of the parallel lines constituting the pattern
indicates a quantity (horizontal lines represent 0; clockwise rotation of one-, two-,
three-quarters of 90° represent respectively a loss of -1, -2, -3 tokens; counter-
clockwise rotation of one-, two-, three-quarters of 90° represent respectively a
gain of 1, 2, 3 tokens). (b,c) Each lottery is represented by a pie chart, as in
Stauﬀer et al. [22]. Each pie chart can be composed of two slices. Each slice
encodes one possible outcome of the lottery (x or 0). The arc length of each slice
represents the probability of the corresponding outcome (p or 1 − p). The relative
positions on the pie chart of each slice are randomly determined at each trial.
Panel b and c represents the task as it was coded at the University Strasbourg
and the IMN of Bordeaux, respectively.

19

-3-2-10+2+1+3acbTimeCue contact=trial onsetStart cueLotteries onsetCue contact=chosen optionOutcome onsetRewarddelivery........................TimeRewarddeliveryBar return=outcome onsetCue contact=chosen optionLotteries onsetBar grasping=trialonsetFigure 3: Consideration of the diﬀerence between expected values
when probabilities are equal but amounts diﬀer, when amounts are
equal but probability diﬀer, or when there is a trade-oﬀ between quan-
tity and probability. (a,d) Probability of choosing the right option against
the diﬀerence of EV when probabilities are equal but amounts diﬀer. (b,e) Prob-
ability of choosing the right option against the diﬀerence of EV when amounts
are equal but probability diﬀer. (c,f ) Probability of choosing the riskiest option
against the diﬀerence of EV when there is a trading-oﬀ between quantity and
probability. In all panels, blue lines are related to choices involving gains, and
orange lines to choices involving losses. Thin lines represent the value of ordinary
two parameters sigmoid functions using the best-ﬁt parameter values of each
individual (one line corresponds to one individual). Thick lines represent the
average value of these functions.

20

21012EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose right)aSame probabilities(gain)21012EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose right)bSame amounts(gain)1.00.50.00.51.0EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose riskiest)cQuantity-prob. tradeoff(gain)21012EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose right)dSame probabilities(loss)21012EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose right)eSame amounts(loss)1.00.50.00.51.0EVrightEVleft0.00.51.0p(choose riskiest)fQuantity-prob. tradeoff(loss)Figure 4: Modelling of monkeys’ attitude toward risk. (a,d) Monkeys’
utility function, (b,e) monkeys’ probability weighting function, (c,f ) monkeys’
probability to choose the right lottery according to the diﬀerence of Subjective
Expected Utility (SEU) between right and left lotteries. In all panels, blue
lines are related to choices involving gains, and orange lines to choices involving
losses. Thin lines represent the indicated function using the average best-ﬁt
parameter values over the data chunks of one individual, and thick lines represent
the indicated function using the mean of the average best-ﬁt parameter values
over all the individuals. The mean value ± STD) for each parameter for each
condition is indicated in the left corner.

21

01x01u(x)=0.37±0.29aUtility function(gain)0.00.51.0p0.00.51.0w(p)=0.86±0.24bProbability weighting function(gain)1.00.50.00.51.0SEU(Lright)SEU(Lleft)0.00.51.0P(ChooseLright)=0.17±0.05=0.11±0.18cSoftmax function(gain)10x10u(x)=0.49±0.21dUtility function(loss)0.00.51.0p0.00.51.0w(p)=0.72±0.20eProbability weighting function(loss)1.00.50.00.51.0SEU(Lright)SEU(Lleft)0.00.51.0P(ChooseLright)=0.19±0.06=0.07±0.12fSoftmax function(loss)Figure 5: Simulation of 1000 agents playing 100 lotteries and over
1000 generations. (a,c) Probability weighting function. (b,d) Utility function.
The initial population is generated using parameters (αk, βk) randomly and
uniformly drawn from [αmin, αmax] × [βmin, βmax]. The apparent asymmetry of
initial curves comes from the non-linearity of parameter eﬀects on function shapes.
After 1000 epochs where we applied the selection of the best agents, generated
new agents from their parameters and introduced a few random variations, the
ﬁnal mean behaviour of agents is shown using a thick black curve.

22

0.00.20.40.60.81.0p0.00.20.40.60.81.0w(p)aProbability weighting functionInitial population0.00.20.40.60.81.0x0.00.20.40.60.81.0u(x)bUtility functionInitial population0.00.20.40.60.81.0p0.00.20.40.60.81.0w(p)cProbability weighting functionFinal population0.00.20.40.60.81.0x0.00.20.40.60.81.0u(x)dUtility functionFinal populationFigure 6: Analysis of the mean gain of a population of agents. Each
point on the left panel corresponds to the mean gain of a subset (20% on
the ﬁgure) of a group of NA agents playing NT lotteries. Depending on their
probability weighting and utility functions, the mean gain of best individuals
might be better than the expected value. The white line corresponds to the
separation along with the median score (1.23) of all simulations. On the right,
we display the utility function (blue) and the probability weighting function
(red) for a few representative points (a-i).

23

0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6 (probability weighting function, red)0.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.60.8 (utility function, blue)abcdefghiMean gain of the luckiest individuals1.21.31.41.51.6risk averserisk seekinglow ++ / high --low -- / high ++abcdefghiFigure 7: Parameter sensitivity. The exact shape of the ﬁnal population’s
functions is dependent on the selection rate, mutation rate and selection rate.
However, for a selection rate below 35%, the general pattern remains the same:
risk-seeking (convexity of the utility function) and overestimation of the small
probabilities and underestimation of the high probabilities (inverted S-shaped
probability weighting function).

24

0.70.80.91.01.11.20.30.20.10.00.10.050.100.150.200.250.300.350.400.450.500.550.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.950.010.020.030.040.050.100.200.500.050.100.150.200.250.300.350.400.45Detail of left panel0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6 (probability weighting function)0.60.40.20.00.20.40.6 (utility function)risk averserisk seekinglow ++ / high --low -- / high ++Parameter sensitivity as mean of final populationselection ratemutation ratemixture rateFigure 8: Comparison of monkeys’ and agents’ behaviour. (a) Using
the result from the monkey’s data ﬁtting, we can represent the population for
gain (blue) and loss (red) showing that the monkeys display a tendency to
overestimate small probabilities and underestimate large probabilities (both in
gain and loss domain) and that they are risk-averse in the gain domain but
risk-seeking in the loss domain. Subjects ‘Hav’ and ‘Gla’ are rhesus monkeys.
(b) Initial population and ﬁnal population of agents. The mean behaviour
(black cross) is closer to monkeys’ mean behaviour in the loss domain (red cross)
compared to monkey’s mean behaviour in the gain domain (blue cross). It is to
be noted that the exact ﬁnal position depends on the selection, mutation, and
mixture rate (see Figure 5).

25

0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6 (probability weighting function)0.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.60.8 (utility function)risk averserisk seekinglow ++ / high --low -- / high ++AbrAlaBarCesGlaHavNemPacYohAbrAlaBarCesGlaHavNemPacYohaMonkeys fitted behaviourgainloss0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6 (probability weighting function)risk averserisk seekinglow ++ / high --low -- / high ++bAgents' behaviourinitialfinalparameter name

number of lotteries NL
number of agents NA
number of epochs NE
number of trials NT
wα
uβ
αmin, αmax
βmin, βmax
γ (selection rate)
δ (mutation rate)
(cid:15) (mixture rate)
PRNG seed used for all displayed results

value

1000
1000
1000
100
x → e−(−lnp)α
x → e1−β
0.25, 1.75
−0.80, +0.80
0.20
0.02
0.25
123

Table 1: Parameters used in all simulations unless stated otherwise.

26

