Using the Amygdala in decision making
Maxime Carrere, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Maxime Carrere, Frédéric Alexandre. Using the Amygdala in decision making. Fifth International
Symposium on Biology of Decision Making (SBDM), May 2015, Paris, France. ￿hal-01237891￿

HAL Id: hal-01237891

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01237891

Submitted on 3 Dec 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Using the Amygdala in decision making.

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre
Mnemosyne team, University of Bordeaux, LaBRI, Inria Bordeaux, IMN

April 15, 2015

Decision making is often described as composed of multiple loops, mainly the limbic, associative, and motor
loops, in the Prefrontal Cortex and Basal Ganglia. While the various nuclei of the Amygdala has been traditionaly
considered for their role in fear prediction and respondent conditioning [9, 4, 7], structural similitudes have been
reported between the central amygdala (CeA) and structures involved in decision making the nucleus accumbens
and the pallidum [5]. Particularly, the lateral capsular, lateral and medial subdivisions of CeA possess similarities in
structures and connectivity respectively with the shell, the core of the nucleus accumbens and the pallidum. This,
along with a spatial continuity between CeA and the shell of the nucleus accumbens [5], leads to the hypothesis that
respondant conditioning could be seen as a loop more primitive but similar to decision-making loops. Moreover,
lesions of the amygdala, and especially of the basal nucleus of the amygdala, impair operant conditioning paradigms
like devaluation or reversal [8], or decision making in gambling [1]. In a direct way, learning associations between
CS (conditioned stimuli) and US (unconditioned stimuli, ie. reward or punishment) allows the amygdala to learn
CS values [2], and to provide such values in to the OFC and ventral striatum for goal-directed behaviors [8]. In an
indirect way, the amygdala projects to VTA-SNc for dopamine and to the basal forebrain for acetylcholine, thus
providing indirect reinforcing signals to the decision making system.

We present here a simple neuronal model of the amygdala and propose to compare it to the decision making loops.
Our model is composed of ﬁve populations from three diﬀerent amygdalar nuclei. Neurons in these populations
are described using a classical mean-rate formalism and a sigmoid activation function. Learning is hebbian and
uses a Rescorla-Wagner like prediction error. One speciﬁcity is that amygdalar activation also takes into account
the eﬀect of acetylcholine, which modulates the competition between diﬀerent amygdalar populations for chosing a
sensory-based rule or a contextual one [11, 10]. Acetylcholine concentration is computed from the recent prediction
errors of our model, and as such reﬂects the known uncertainty in reward prediction [12]. This model successfully
reproduces experimental data recorded in fear and extinction conditioning [7], along with the eﬀect of pathways
impairment as reported in [11, 10, 3].

This model is the ﬁrst step in modeling operant conditioning and goal-directed behavior. Thus, ongoing work
is to extend this model to operant conditioning, by including OFC, shell and ventral pallidum structures. Another
work in progress proposes to use the uncertainty level computed by our amygdalar network to help a decision
making system to choose between exploration and exploitation. If known uncertainty is low, it means the model
is correctly predicting the rule, so it should favour exploitation. At the opposite, the higher the uncertainty in
predicting US, the more should it explore, because its current strategy is not reliable.

We propose to highlight here both the similarities in functioning and reciprocal inﬂuences between respondent

conditioning, as performed by our amygdalar model, and decision making.

[1] A. Bechara, H. Damasio, A. R. Damasio, and G. P. Lee. Different contribu-
tions of the human amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex to decision-
making. The Journal of Neuroscience, 19(13):5473–5481, July 1999.

[7] C. Herry, S. Ciocchi, V. Senn, L. Demmou, C. Muller, and A. Luthi. Switch-
ing on and off fear by distinct neuronal circuits. Nature, 454(7204):600–606,
July 2008.

[2] M. A. Belova, J. J. Paton, S. E. Morrison, and C. D. Salzman. Expecta-
tion modulates neural responses to pleasant and aversive stimuli in primate
amygdala. Neuron, 55(6):970–984, Apr. 2015.

[8] P. C. Holland and M. Gallagher. Amygdala-frontal interactions and reward

expectancy. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 14(2), 2004.

[3] L. Calandreau, P. Trifilieff, N. Mons, L. Costes, M. Marien, A. Marighetto,
J. Micheau, R. Jaffard, and A. Desmedt. Extracellular hippocampal acetyl-
choline level controls amygdala function and promotes adaptive conditioned
emotional response. The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬃcial journal of the Society
for Neuroscience, 26(52):13556–13566, Dec. 2006.

[4] R. N. Cardinal, J. A. Parkinson, J. Hall, and B. J. Everitt. Emotion and mo-
tivation: the role of the amygdala, ventral striatum, and prefrontal cortex.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 26(3):321–352, 2002.

[5] M. D. Cassell, L. J. Freedman, and C. Shi. The intrinsic organization of the
central extended amygdala. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 877:217–
241, June 1999.

[9] J. LeDoux. The amygdala. Current Biology, 17(20):R868–R874, Oct. 2007.

[10] C. K. McIntyre, L. K. Marriott, and P. E. Gold. Cooperation Between Mem-
ory Systems: Acetylcholine Release in the Amygdala Correlates Positively
With Performance on a Hippocampus-Dependent Task. Behavioral Neuroscience,
117:320–326, 2003.

[11] R. A. Prado-Alcal´a, M. Haiek, S. Rivas, G. Roldan-Roldan, and G. L.
Physiology & Behavior,

Quirarte. Reversal of extinction by scopolamine.
56(1):27–30, July 1994.

[6] d. O. G. H. H. Z. Heimer, Alheid. The accumbens: beyond the core-shell

[12] A. J. Yu and P. Dayan. Uncertainty, Neuromodulation, and Attention. Neuron,

dichotomy. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci, pages 354–81, 1997.

46, 2005.

1

