Decision making mechanisms in a connectionist model of the basal ganglia 

M. Guthrie1,2, C. Héricé1,2, R. Khalil2, M. Moftah3, T. Boraud1,2, A. Garenne1,2 
1 Université Bordeaux-Segalen, UMR 5293, Institut des Maladies Neurodegeneratives, Bordeaux, France. 
2 CNRS, UMR 5293, Institut des Maladies Neurodegeneratives, Bordeaux, France 
3 Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Alexandria University, 21151, Alexandria, Egypt 

Introduction 
Basal ganglia (BG) are known to hosts mechanisms of action selection and its adaptation to a changing 
environment. Their architecture consist of several parallel functional loops connecting back to distinct areas of 
cortex (motor, cognitive and limbic) and processing different modalities of decision making. The picture of parallel 
loops is complicated by convergence and divergence that implies that the various loops are interacting. 
A previous BG model was developed by Martin Guthrie. This model was built of interacting bloc-diagram based on 
rate-models and it was able to learn optimized action selection during a probabilistic reward task. The aim of the 
present work is to refine and extend these results to a cell-synapse level through a bottom-up approach. This should 
allow us to: 
1.  highlight structure-function relationship and circuitry emerging properties 
2.  Investigate cell-scale mechanisms impact on the whole model capacities (learning and decision-making) 

Material and Method 
Behavioral task 

Implementation 

4 target shapes are associated with 
different reward probabilities. At each 
trial, 2 targets, randomly chosen among 
the 4, are presented in random positions. 

A choice is made by the model and the 
reward is given or not according to its 
own reward probability (probabilistic 
learning task). 

The model aim is to learn to choose the 
optimum target on each trial, which is 
the target with the higher probability of 
reward. 

Figure 2. Task design\*\* 

Figure 1. Overview of model architecture\*. 

Network architecture 
The model is designed in a manner consistent with known 
anatomy and electrophysiology in three main areas. 
Each neuron is implemented by a leaky integrate-and-fire 
model: 

Vm t( )
Rm
Each subpopulation is composed of a cell assembly which 
size is related to the respective cell ratios. 
Learning is modeled as an increase in cortico-striatal 
cognitive projections (synaptic plasticity). 

dVm t( )
dt

= I t( )

Cm ⋅

+

€ 

Figure 3. Modeling tool java implementation 

A 

B 

C 

Figure 4. Model pathways. A) Direct pathway. B) Hyperdirect pathway. C) Pathway crosstalk 

Results 
Global network properties 
A manual tuning of the strength of the different projections has provided a model 
which is robust to noise and consistent regarding (i) the average and relative levels of 
activity of each cell assembly and (ii) the interactions between each subpopulation. 
Feed-forward inhibition and action selection 
Thanks to the architecture and the noise, the model spontaneously selects an action 
(defined here by the highest motor cortex activity) which breaks the symmetry. 
During this "exploration" phase, the naïve network selects motor alternative with 
equal probabilities. 

Figure 5. Cortical sub-
populations recordings (Hz) 

0   

10   

90   

40   

30   

80   

50   

70   

20   

60   

100   

f
o

%

e
h
t

\*   

s
l
a
i
r
t

s
e
u
l
a
v

n
e
s
o
h
c

g
n
i
r
u
d

Cognitive bias of motor selection 
The 
symmetry breaking occurs with equal 
probabilities regarding the motor and cognitive 
activation in a naïve model but with a superior 
probability for motor-cognitive coupled pairs. 
Discussion 
The neural network implementation of a BG stochastic model is developed, embedded 
in a sensory-motor closed-loop environment and applied to an action-selection task. 
This neuron level description model allows for a better understanding of the 
information flows dynamics in the BG and for an investigation of the 
physiopathological models including synapses, cells and neuromodulators properties. 
To achieve this study two steps have to be reached: 
- role of the cognitive bias on action selection as a function of learnt reward values. 
- implementation of a dopamine modulated STDP to reproduce a complete learning 
process with a bottom-up and model-free paradigm. 

Figure 6. Average of chosen values 

C1&C5   OR   
C2&C7   

C7   

C1   

C5   

C2   

\* Guthrie et al, 2013

 \*\* Pasquereau et al, 2007 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
