Impact of the Konio pathway in the thalamocortical visual system: a
modeling study Carlos Carvajal, Thierry Viéville, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Carlos Carvajal, Thierry Viéville, Frédéric Alexandre. Impact of the
Konio pathway in the thala- mocortical visual system: a modeling study.
Twenty Second Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting : CNS 2013, Jul
2013, Paris, France. 14 (Suppl 1), pp.P6, 2013. ￿hal-00842314￿

HAL Id: hal-00842314

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00842314

Submitted on 8 Jul 2013

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Carvajal et al. BMC Neuroscience 2013, 14(Suppl 1):P6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/14/S1/P6

P O S T E R P R E S E N T A T I O N

Open Access

Impact of the Konio pathway in the thalamocortical visual system: a
modeling study Carlos Carvajal1,2,3*, Thierry Viéville1, Frédéric
Alexandre1,2

From Twenty Second Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting: CNS*2013
Paris, France. 13-18 July 2013

Background In the early visual system, regarding the detection of a
visual event, motion information is pre-processed in the Magnocellular
pathway, while it has been shown that the Koniocellular pathway [1] also
plays an important role, providing a global analysis about such a kind
of informa- interplay tion processing. However, the functional between
these two parallel pathways remains partially understood. Previous works
have attacked this question by studying the signals produced by the
corresponding ganglion cells [1] and their elaboration at further steps
[2], rather than proposing to model the underlying mechanisms at a
mesoscopic level, i.e., focusing on the functional aspects of such dual
processing. Neurobiologi- cal studies dedicated to the thalamocortical
stage of the early visual system provide knowledge on particular char-
acteristics of the system, namely: 1) the variety of cell types in the
retina [2], inducing different pathways, 2) the variety of
thalamocortical projections through focused vs diffuse efferences to the
cortex [3], from core vs matrix (specific vs non-specific) thalamic
nuclei, and 3) the vari- ety of kinds of connectivity between thalamic,
cortical and collicular areas (i.e., feedforward, feedback, shortcuts,
driver and modulator information flows [4]).

Methods To figure out the impact of these multi-scale characteris- tics,
we propose here a systemic approach at the struc- ture level. To this
end, we have developed a reduced bio- inspired distributed asynchronous
model of the primitive mammal visual system, considering only motion
event detection. This computational model is fed with natural image
sequences, and is implemented as a large size

1Inria, Mnemosyne Team, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research Center, 33400
Talence, France Full list of author information is available at the end
of the article

2.  

distributed calculation [5] with thousands of computation units per
structure.

Results Thanks to the dual analysis integrating local and larger image
cues, we test the system for the detection of spe- cific dynamical
patterns (which could be interpreted as, e.g., threats or targets). Our
simulations aim at showing that these multi-scale interactions help
improving the speed and/or quality of such critical tasks, including
tar- get selection and tracking. We expect this approach to propose an
innovative answer to the interplay issues quoted here, generalizable to
other visuo-motor func- tions. This also provides a platform that could
be used as a testbed for new hypotheses. Further information flows to be
included could correspond to the Parvocel- lular pathway (and its
related functions). Other struc- tures such as the pulvinar, or higher
cortical areas, would also allow us to explore even more developed
mechanisms and behaviors [3,6].

Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Nicolas Rougier for his
help with DANA [5] in the early development stages. This work is
supported by the ANR/ CONICYT KEOpS project, the Lorraine Region and the
CORTINA associated team.

Author details 1Inria, Mnemosyne Team, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research
Center, 33400 Talence, France. 2LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, Institut
des Maladies Neurodégénératives, 33000 Bordeaux, France. 3Université de
Lorraine, LORIA UMR 7503, 54600 Villers-lès-Nancy, France.

Published: 8 July 2013

References 1.

Hendry SH, Reid RC: The koniocellular pathway in primate vision. Annu
Rev Neurosci 2000, 23:127-153. Nassi JJ, Callaway EM: Parallel
processing strategies of the primate visual system. Nat Rev Neurosci
2009, 10(5):360-372.

© 2013 Carvajal et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open
Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.

Carvajal et al. BMC Neuroscience 2013, 14(Suppl 1):P6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/14/S1/P6

Page 2 of 2

3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  

Jones EG: The thalamic matrix and thalamocortical synchrony. Trends
Neurosci 2001, 24(10):595-601. Sherman SM, Guillery RW: The role of the
thalamus in the flow of information to the cortex. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 2002, 357(1428):1695-1708. Fix J, Rougier N: DANA:
Distributed numerical and adaptive modelling framework. Network 2012,
23(4):237-253. Girard B, Berthoz A: From brainstem to cortex:
computational models of saccade generation circuitry. Prog Neurobiol
2005, 77(4):215-251.

doi:10.1186/1471-2202-14-S1-P6 Cite this article as: Carvajal et al.:
Impact of the Konio pathway in the thalamocortical visual system: a
modeling study. BMC Neuroscience 2013 14(Suppl 1):P6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central and take full advantage
of:

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at www.biomedcentral.com/submit


