MEG Encoding using Neural Language & Speech Models and Shared Context
Semantics in Listening Stories Subba Reddy Oota, Nathan Trouvain, Gaël
Jobard, Frédéric Alexandre,

Xavier Hinaut

To cite this version:

Subba Reddy Oota, Nathan Trouvain, Gaël Jobard, Frédéric Alexandre,
Xavier Hinaut. MEG En- coding using Neural Language & Speech Models and
Shared Context Semantics in Listening Stories. SNL 2023 - Society for
the Neurobiology of Language, Oct 2023, Marseille, France. .
￿hal-04401769￿

HAL Id: hal-04401769

https://hal.science/hal-04401769

Submitted on 17 Jan 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

MEG Encoding using Neural Language & Speech Models and Shared Context
Semantics in Listening Stories Gael Jobard3

Subba Reddy Oota1,2,3 Nathan Trouvain1,2,3

Frédéric Alexandre1,2,3

Xavier Hinaut1,2,3

1INRIA Bordeaux

2LaBRI, UMR 5800

3IMN, UMR 5293, Universite de Bordeaux, France

Figure 3:Approach to directly test for the alignment between a LM/SM and
MEG brain recordings.

Figure 1:Language Models (LMs) and Speech Models (SMs) have achieved
impressive performance across

many benchmarks

Figure 2:Brain alignment of a LM/SM

Figure 5:Topo map for Average Normalized predictivity by Data2Vec
(across subjects) for MEG activity.

Word onset is at 0ms. Layer 2 (top), Layer 7 (middle), and Layer 11
(bottom).

References

[1] Toneva et al. 2019.

Interpreting and improving natural-language processing (in machines)
with natural language-processing (in the brain).

[2] Gwilliams et al. 2022.

Meg-masc: a high-quality magneto-encephalography dataset for evaluating
natural speech processing.

[3] Oota et al. 2023.

Meg encoding using word context semantics in listening stories.

Acknowledgements

1 We thank Inria for the PhD funding and ANR DeepPool project.

Figure 4:Performance comparison on encoding models


