Glumpy
Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Nicolas P. Rougier. Glumpy: Fast, scalable and beautiful scientific visualization. EuroScipy, Aug
2015, Cambridge, United Kingdom. ￿hal-01217524￿

HAL Id: hal-01217524

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01217524

Submitted on 19 Oct 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

there's more at 
glumpy.github.io

nicolas.Rougier@inria.fr

Realtime fluid 
simulation ...

SPIRAL GALAXY SIMULATION
USING DENSITY WAVE THEORY

...USING GPU 

any number
of isolines
 on the GPU

MANDATORY GPU FRACTAL

waow !!! 
it's really
 super fast !

400 FPS on a macbook pro

3D plot using antialiased lines and text...

text is rendered using 
signed distant fields

any 
modification 
is ...

interactive session using the 
regular python shell allows 
for dynamic data exploration

... displayed 
immediately

did you know that a set of 
cones seen from above
 is a voronoi diagram ?

...with antigrain quality

320 REALTIME SIGNALS
(1,000 points each)

HIGH-FREQUENCY SIGNAL USING GPU MULTISAMPLING

ANy kinD of 
projection can be 
computed directly
on the GPU

CONic equal 
area (albers)

cylindrical

Glumpy is a python library for scientific visualization that is both fast, 
scalable and beautiful. Glumpy offers an intuitive interface between 
numpy and modern OpenGL.

Numpy arrays are tracked automatically such that any change on the 
CPU is reflected automatically on the GPU, making the integration 
seamless. 

glumpy provides more than 100 examples showing how to achieve this 
or that visualization, such as antialiasing, text rendering, isolines 
computation, image filtering, cartographic projection, realtime 
signals, FLUID simulation, SVG rendering, etc.

Glumpy is a laboratory for experimenting ideas to be
integrated into the vispy project that lives at vispy.org,
But glumpy can also be used as a standalone library.

spherical harmonics on the GPU

import numpy as np
from glumpy import app, collection

window = app.Window(1024,1024, color=(1,1,1,1))
@window.event
def on\_draw(dt):
 window.clear()
 points.draw()

points = Collection.points()
points.append(np.random.normal(0.0,0.5,(1000000,3)))
app.run()

