Cell to network computational model of the epileptic
human hippocampus suggests specific roles of network
and channel dysfunctions in the ictal and interictal
oscillations
Amélie Aussel, Radu Ranta, Olivier Aron, Sophie Colnat-Coulbois, Louise

Tyvaert, Louis Maillard, Laure Buhry

To cite this version:

Amélie Aussel, Radu Ranta, Olivier Aron, Sophie Colnat-Coulbois, Louise Tyvaert, et al.. Cell to net-
work computational model of the epileptic human hippocampus suggests specific roles of network and
channel dysfunctions in the ictal and interictal oscillations. Journal of Computational Neuroscience,
2022, 50 (4), pp.519-535. ￿10.1007/s10827-022-00829-5￿. ￿hal-03721996￿

HAL Id: hal-03721996

https://cnrs.hal.science/hal-03721996

Submitted on 13 Jul 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Cell to network computational model of the epileptic
human hippocampus suggests speciﬁc roles of network and
channel dysfunctions in the ictal and interictal oscillations

Am´elie Aussel · Radu Ranta · Olivier Aron · Sophie Colnat-Coulbois ·
Louise Tyvaert · Louis Maillard · Laure Buhry

the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later

a role on the generation of interictal patterns, and (iv)
seizure-like activity and fast ripples are more likely to
occur during wakefulness and interictal spikes during
sleep.

Keywords hippocampus, computational model-
ing, epilepsy, sleep-wake cycle, realistic anatomy,
pathological connectivity

the neuronal

(channelopathies,

Abstract The mechanisms underlying the generation
of hippocampal epileptic seizures and interictal events
and their interactions with the sleep-wake cycle are
not yet fully understood. Indeed, medial temporal lobe
epilepsy is associated with hippocampal abnormalities
both at
impaired
potassium and chloride dynamics) and network level
(neuronal and axonal loss, mossy ﬁber sprouting), with
more frequent seizures during wakefulness compared
with slow-wave sleep. In this article, starting from
our previous computational modeling work of the
hippocampal
formation based on realistic topology
and synaptic connectivity, we study the role of micro-
and mesoscale pathological conditions of the epileptic
hippocampus in the generation and maintenance of
seizure-like theta and interictal oscillations. We show,
through the simulations of hippocampal activity during
slow-wave sleep and wakefulness that: (i) both mossy
ﬁber sprouting and sclerosis account for seizure-like
theta activity, (ii) but they have antagonist eﬀects
(seizure-like activity occurrence increases with sprout-
ing but decreases with sclerosis), (iii) though impaired
potassium and chloride dynamics have little inﬂuence
on the generation of seizure-like activity, they do play

A. Aussel E-mail: amelie.aussel@inria.fr Present address: IN-
RIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France
A. Aussel · L. Buhry
Laboratoire Lorrain de Recherche en Informatique et ses ap-
plications (LORIA UMR 7503, University of Lorraine-INRIA-
CNRS, F-54506)

A. Aussel · L. O. Aron · S. Colnat-Coulbois · L. Tyvaert ·
L.Maillard · R. Ranta
Centre de Recherche en Automatique de Nancy (CRAN-
CNRS UMR 7039 University of Lorraine, FRANCE)

O. Aron · S. Colnat-Coulbois · L. Tyvaert · L.Maillard
Department of Neurology, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, FRANCE.

2

1 Introduction

The hippocampus can exhibit oscillatory rhythms in
a wide range of frequencies, depending on the cogni-
tive task to perform, the vigilance state, the possible
pathological state, etc. Altered hippocampal rhythms
are involved in medial temporal lobe epilepsy, the most
frequent form of focal epilepsy, often pharmacoresis-
tant and aﬀecting about 0.6 person per 1000 people
[Asadi-Pooya et al., 2017]. Beside hippocampal seizures
(complex phenomena typically consisting in episodes of
abnormal, excessive and/or hypersynchronous neural
activity, as deﬁned in [Fisher et al., 2014] or [Jiruska
et al., 2013]), the epileptic hippocampus also produces
frequent interictal epileptic abnormal rhythms which
have been shown to be associated with cognitive impair-
ments of episodic memory ([Krauss et al., 1997]), mem-
ory maintenance and retrieval ([Kleen et al., 2013]), and
memory consolidation ([Gelinas et al., 2016]).

Some computational models have been previously
developed to reproduce epileptic seizures (see the
review from [Stefanescu et al., 2012]) or interictal
spikes (brief peaks of synchronous activity, see for
example [Demont-Guignard et al., 2009]), but these
models cannot fully explain the correlations between
neuropathological conditions of
the hippocampus,
physiological processes such as the sleep-wake cycle,
and the resulting oscillations (note still that a broader
view can be found in [Jiruska et al., 2014]). Indeed,
computational models have typically studied epilep-
tic phenomena at a single scale ([Wendling et al.,
2012]). They usually focus either, on one hand, on
microscopic mechanisms with rather detailed neuron
models, but only small hippocampal substructures
[Demont-Guignard et al., 2009, Ratnadurai Girid-
haran et al., 2014], which do not allow to take into
account the speciﬁcity of the hippocampal anatomy
and connectivity responsible for the richness of the
produced rhythms; or, on the second hand, on macro-
scopic features that grant importance to connectivity
patterns and excitation/inhibition balance, while the
implication of intracellular dynamics, which also aﬀects
rhythm genesis, remains unclear.

One can cite, among computational studies focusing
on cellular pathologies, the work of [Cressman et al.,
2009] on the role of potassium and sodium dynamics,
or [Dyhrfjeld-Johnsen, 2008] on the role of hyperpo-
larization activated current (other computational mod-
els of the epileptic dentate gyrus can be found in [Te-
jada and Roque, 2014]). At the network level, [Wendling
et al., 2002] model the synaptic coupling between neu-
ronal populations and take into account diﬀerent types
of populations of inhibitory and excitatory neurons,

Am´elie Aussel et al.

[Netoﬀ, 2004] reproduce the topology of synaptic con-
nections, [Morgan and Soltesz, 2008] study the role of
sclerosis and mossy ﬁber sprouting. Some more recent
works focus on epileptic cortical tissue but have inter-
esting conclusions on epileptic networks and their dy-
namics in general. One can cite [Liou et al., 2020] which
developed a 2-D model studying seizure onset and prop-
agation in relation with synaptic plasticity and noise,
and [Rich et al., 2022] which tackles the link between
reduced network heterogeneity and ictogenic dynamics.
However, all these works at the network level do not
explicitly address the role of intracellular mechanisms.
Overall, and as is also pointed by [van den Heuvel et al.,
2019], this highlights the need for a multi-scale model
comprising the joint eﬀects of both network and micro-
scopic properties.

In this context, the main objective of this article
is to provide better understanding of pathological
hippocampal oscillations: epileptic seizures, interictal
spikes and fast ripples. We do so by developing a
multi-scale computational model of the hippocampus
regrouping many mechanisms previously described in
separate works, and analyzing its oscillatory activity
as we vary diﬀerent parameters representing either
structural or functional properties of the network,
associated with pathological modiﬁcations typically
observed in epilepsy.

More precisely, we extend a healthy hippocampus
model of the sleep-wake cycle we previously presented
in [Aussel et al., 2018] so as to include four typical
pathological modiﬁcations of the hippocampus seen in
medial temporal lobe epilepsies. In particular, we fo-
cus on hippocampal sclerosis ([Bl¨umcke et al., 2013]),
mossy ﬁber sprouting ([Noebels et al., 2012]), impaired
potassium dynamics ([Lerche et al., 2012], [Coulter and
Steinhauser, 2015]), and impaired chloride dynamics in
pyramidal neurons (and its inﬂuence on inhibition, [Hu-
berfeld et al., 2007]). These modiﬁcations involve both
network connectivity and single neuron dynamics. The
model also includes a simulation of the Local Field Po-
tential (LFP) generated by the neurons, so as to be
comparable with clinical recordings. Typically, we aim
to reproduce morphologies and rhythms in speciﬁc fre-
quency bands characteristic for ictal or interictal events
and extensively explore the ranges of parameters that
give rise to them, rather than ﬁtting one individual’s
precise recordings.

In the present work, we ﬁrst analyze our pathologi-
cal hippocampal network’s behavior under stereotypical
inputs, and study how the four parameters representing
hippocampal sclerosis, mossy ﬁber sprouting, impaired
potassium dynamics and impaired chloride dynamics
can induce saturation or modify neural oscillatory fre-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

3

quency. We also investigate whether the speciﬁc func-
tional connectivity of wakefulness induced by choliner-
gic modulation could make this state more vulnerable
to epilepsy-associated damage.

We then move to a more realistic simulation and
apply signals derived from intracerebral recordings of
individuals with epilepsy as inputs to the network in
order to compare the LFP output of our model to real
recordings. The aim is to assess which parameter set-
tings enable the reproduction, at the LFP output of the
model, of some characteristics of a clinically recorded
hippocampal seizure in the theta frequency band, as
well as of diﬀerent interictal patterns (interictal spikes
and fast ripples). More precisely, we show that mossy
ﬁber sprouting and hippocampal sclerosis determine the
appearance of seizure-like theta activity in the model
(the former parameter facilitates it while the latter hin-
ders it), whereas impaired potassium and chloride dy-
namics mostly aﬀect the number of interictal events.

After presenting the detailed results of these diﬀer-
ent simulations, we focus our discussion on the role and
the balance of the modeled phenomena in epilepsy. We
examine how the network related pathologies (mossy
ﬁber sprouting and sclerosis) and the cellular mech-
anisms (potassium and chloride dynamics) can aﬀect
seizure-like theta episodes and interictal events gener-
ation, in both sleep and wakefulness states. We ﬁnally
discuss the implications of our study of hippocampal
rhythms on cognitive impairments, essentially memory
deﬁcits, usually associated with hippocampal epilepsy.

2 Materials and Methods

In the following subsections, we will brieﬂy present the
main features of our model of the healthy hippocampus
(developed in details in [Aussel et al., 2018] and whose
parameters were explored in [Aussel et al., 2021]), be-
fore showing how it was modiﬁed to account for epilep-
tic abnormalities. We will then explain thoroughly how
we simulated and analyzed the behavior of this epileptic
model.

2.1 Computational modeling of healthy hippocampal
oscillations

The model proposed in this paper is directly inspired
from our previous work ([Aussel et al., 2018]). We re-
call that this model covers multiple scales, from channel
level mechanisms (Hodgkin-Huxley formalism, used to
model classical K and Na channels, but also Calcium-
Activated Nonselective cation channel - CAN) to real-
istic anatomy and modulated connectivity (intra and

inter structures connection probabilities and gains on
synaptic conductances). The model includes more than
thirty thousand neurons to represent the four main re-
gions of the hippocampal formation: the Dentate Gyrus
(DG), CA3, CA1, and the entorhinal cortex (EC). The
number of neurons in each region and the proportion
of excitatory and inhibitory cells were chosen in ac-
cordance with the literature ([Jinno and Kosaka, 2010],
[West and Gundersen, 1990], [Patton and McNaughton,
1995], see [Aussel et al., 2018] for a detailed explana-
tion). The neuron models we use are taken from [Gio-
vannini et al., 2017], which themselves trace back to
the work on hippocampal neurons by [Jochems and
Yoshida, 2015] (and explains the role of the CAN chan-
nel in the persistent ﬁring involved in memory). The
model is driven by a set of parameters (gains, max-
imum probabilities, input characteristics), themselves
with biological signiﬁcance. The complete structure is
given Figure 1. In our previous paper, we have pro-
posed a set of parameters (in blue in Figure 1-B and C)
and mechanisms able to explain sleep-wake variations of
the oscillatory patterns (sharp-wave ripples and theta-
gamma) and the transitions between them. For details,
see [Aussel et al., 2018] and [Aussel et al., 2021].

2.2 Model changes to account for epilepsy

frequent

the most

Among the diﬀerent changes that can occur in an
epileptic hippocampus, we chose to focus on four
of
in particular: hippocampal
sclerosis, mossy ﬁber sprouting, increased excitability
and impaired inhibition of excitatory neurons. For
simplicity reasons, these changes have been targeted
exclusively at excitatory cells (their number, synaptic
connectivity, potassium and chloride dynamics), but
have been chosen so as to provide an overview of
the eﬀect of both cell and network pathologies on
hippocampal dynamics. Parameters linked to epilepsy
in the model appear in red in Figure 1.

Hippocampal sclerosis was modeled by reducing the
number of excitatory neurons in each subregion of the
model as a fraction scl of the maximum pyramidal cell
and granule cell reduction observed in type 1 hippocam-
pal sclerosis (see [Bl¨umcke et al., 2013]). More precisely,
the number of excitatory neurons was set to :

– 10000 · (1 − 0.75scl) in the entorhinal cortex
– 10000 · (1 − 0.6scl) in the dentate gyrus
– 1000 · (1 − 0.8scl) in CA3
– 10000 · (1 − 0.8scl) in CA1

with scl varying between 0 (no sclerosis) and 1 (high
sclerosis). With scl = 0, the number of excitatory neu-

4

Am´elie Aussel et al.

Fig. 1 A- Topology of the entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus used in the model, along with the two simulated electrode
contacts, adapted from [Aussel et al., 2018]. B- Membrane channels of the neuron models used in the network. C- Synaptic
connectivity of our model of the hippocampal formation. The number of neurons of each type in each region is shown inside
black boxes. Purple arrows represent AMPA synaptic interactions, and green arrows represent GABA synaptic interactions,
with next to them the corresponding connection probability and the maximum synaptic conductance. The black arrow represent
input stimulation given to the EC neural populations. In panels B and C, the parameters linked to the sleep-wake cycle appear
in blue and the parameters linked to epilepsy appear in red. D- Outputs of the model. Left : Raster plots of the excitatory
cells activity during 1 second of simulation. Right : Local ﬁeld potential generated by the network during the same simulation.

rons in all regions is the same as in our healthy hip-
pocampus model. The number of inhibitory neurons on
the other hand was left unchanged for several main rea-
sons: ﬁrst, they are not included in the typical deﬁni-
tion of hippocampal sclerosis ([Bl¨umcke et al., 2013]);
second, no inhibitory loss was reported in some studies
(see for example [Babb et al., 1989]) or, as proposed in
other studies (see [Fritschy et al., 1999]), the loss could
be compensated by an increased number of GABA-A
receptors in remaining cells (nevertheless, we have also
simulated the same proportion of neuronal loss on in-
hibitory cells as on excitatory cells in our model and it
did not signiﬁcantly impact our results (see Figure S1
in appendix).

Mossy ﬁber sprouting (see [Noebels et al., 2012])
was represented by including recurrent excitatory con-
nections in the dentate gyrus as well as increasing the
number of connections from excitatory to inhibitory
neurons in this region, and to CA3 and CA1 neurons
(see [Bausch and McNamara, 2000] for a study on hip-
pocampal slice cultures), though reciprocal connections
from CA3 and CA1 to the DG have not been included.
A parameter spr varying between 0 (no sprouting) to 1
(high sprouting) was deﬁned to modify the maximum
synaptic connection probabilities to:

– 0.1 · spr from excitatory to excitatory neurons, so
that each excitatory neuron makes in average 300
synapses with spr = 1, in accordance with the max-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

5

imum 500 new synapses reported in a pilocarpine
epilepsy model in [Buckmaster et al., 2002]

– 0.06·(1+spr) from excitatory to inhibitory neurons,
so that each excitatory neuron forms about 1% of
its new synapses with inhibitory interneurons.

It should be noted that the additional synapses in the
sprouted model obey the same equations as the healthy
synapses, and that they too have a higher probability
of being drawn between spatially close neurons than
between spatially distant neurons.

Regarding the increased excitability of pyramidal
cells, we chose to change the equilibrium poten-
tial
for potassium EK. Though this parameter by
itself is agnostic of the malfunction causing the in-
it could represent for example
creased excitability,
a channelopathy ([Lerche et al., 2012]). A healthy
hippocampus is characterized by EK = −100mV ,
and this value is increased to −90mV or −80mV to
represent epilepsy. As the role of this parameter is to
mimic increased excitability in pyramidal cells, this
change in EK was not implemented in interneurons.

Finally, diﬀerent mechanisms can alter synaptic in-
hibition in medial temporal lobe epilepsy. The one we
focus on here is the accumulation of chloride ions in-
side pyramidal cells changing the reversal potential of
GABA synapses (see [Huberfeld et al., 2007] or [Auer
et al., 2020]).

We propose to model chloride ion concentration in
each excitatory neuron as a simple ﬁrst order process:

d[Cl−]
dt

= −

[Cl−]
τCl

(1)

with τCl the decay rate of [Cl−] (similarly to what has
been done in diﬀerent papers such as [O'Leary et al.,
2013] on calcium concentration). Whenever the excita-
tory neuron emits an action potential, the concentra-
tion [Cl−] is then increased by a ﬁxed amount (set here
to 0.2). A healthy hippocampus is characterized by a
fast τCl decay rate of 100ms; we increased this value up
to 0.5s or 1s to represent the abnormal accumulation
of intracellular chloride in epilepsy.

The expression of the resting potential EI of the
inhibitory synaptic current received by the neuron is
then modiﬁed to :

EI =

(cid:26) −80mV if [Cl−] ≤ 0.5
−50mV otherwise.

(2)

i.e., when the concentration of chloride ions inside a
neuron gets too high, the reversal potential of the in-
hibitory synapses received by the neurons is increased
to EI = −50 mV (as suggested in the experimental

work from [Pathak et al., 2007]), which is above the
resting potential of the neuron, and the synapses be-
come excitatory. This model has voluntarily been kept
relatively simple as there is to the best of our knowl-
edge no modeling literature on this topic as of today,
and [Pathak et al., 2007] suggests that GABA rever-
sal potential can reach a plateau of around −50 mV
after only a few spikes. The numerical values involved
in the model (the threshold of [Cl−] above which the
synapse gets excitatory, the decay rate of [Cl−], and
the increase of [Cl−] for each spike) have been cho-
sen empirically after simulation with diﬀerent values so
that inhibitory synapses resting potentials are scarcely
modiﬁed in a simulation with parameters representing
a healthy hippocampus. The alteration of synaptic inhi-
bition is restricted to excitatory neurons in our model,
as one of the main mechanisms inducing this pathol-
ogy, an anomaly in KCC2 transporter expression, has
been mostly reported in pyramidal and granule cells of
the hippocampus (see [Auer et al., 2020], or [Chamma
et al., 2012] for a more general overview on KCC2).

To summarize, our study introduces 4 new patholog-
ical parameters in our hippocampal model, scl, spr, EK
and τCl, representing respectively hippocampal scle-
rosis, mossy ﬁber sprouting, pyramidal cell hyperex-
citability and impaired inhibition. These parameters
are to be studied in relation with the vigilance state,
which can be set to either slow-wave sleep or wakeful-
ness, according to the methodology described in our
previous works [Aussel et al., 2018] and [Aussel et al.,
2021], and recalled in Table 1.

Parameter

Slow-wave sleep Wakefulness

Ge

ge

Gi

gCAN

1

1

3

1/3

1
0.5µS/cm2

3
25µS/cm2

Table 1 Choice of network parameters for the sleep and
wakefulness state

2.3 Output of the hippocampal model: LFP simulation

Our goal is to construct a full model, able to compare
with real electrophysiological signals recorded in indi-
viduals with epilepsy. But the model described in the
previous section is constructed using point neurons, and
point neurons cannot generate extracellular potentials,
as they do not respect current conservation laws. A min-
imal neuron model able to generate LFP has to be dipo-
lar ([Pettersen et al., 2012]). As the LFP is thought to

6

Am´elie Aussel et al.

be mainly due to synaptic currents, the neural dipoles
are supposed to form between the dendritic and somatic
compartments of the neurons.

For each excitatory neuron, its projection on the
stratum moleculare was thus computed as an estima-
tion of the position of its apical dendrites (Figure 1-A),
and its projection on the stratum oriens as an estima-
tion of the position of its basal dendrites. The synap-
tic compartments of the neural elementary dipole was
set to the basal or apical dendrites depending on the
synapse type, following existing literature (see for ex-
ample [Andersen et al., 2007]). This is slightly diﬀerent
from our previous model [Aussel et al., 2018] where all
synapses locations were assigned to the apical dendrite
of target neurons. As interneurons contributions to the
LFP are very small [Mazzoni et al., 2015], their micro-
scopic geometry and thus the LFP they generate were
neglected (point neurons).

The analyzed output is the extracellular potential
generated by the network, at a macroscopic scale (an
example is shown on Figure 1-D, and an animation is
also provided as Supplementary Material).

The modelling of the LFP follows the approach pro-
posed in [Mazzoni et al., 2015]. More precisely, the po-
tential in every point in space was approximated by
a weighted sum of the synaptic currents (both excita-
tory and inhibitory) arriving at each pyramidal neuron
(the inﬂuence of the synaptic currents arriving onto in-
terneurons was neglected). Considering the neurons as
dipoles (with orientation and amplitude given by the
above described projections of the soma), the contri-
bution U of a neuron of length L to the extracellular
potential at any point in space, at a distance r and an
angle θ from the midpoint of the neuron, writes as:

U =

L cos θ
4πσr2 (IsynE + IsynI )

(3)

where σ = 0.3 S/m is the conductivity of the extracel-
lular medium, which we considered homogeneous.

The LFP at one point is the sum of the contributions
from all the excitatory neurons in the entorhinal cortex
and the hippocampus (dentate gyrus, CA3, and CA1):
LFP=(cid:80) U . In order to model the signal recorded by
the macroscopic electrode and to compare it with real
patient recordings, we averaged the LFP on two sets of
144 points evenly distributed on a cylinder of diameter
0.8mm going through the network, each of them repre-
senting a 2mm-long contact, separated by 1.5mm,and
computed the diﬀerence between the two resulting sig-
nals, as in a bipolar sEEG montage (see ﬁgure 1-A).
This bipolar montage was used in the patients record-
ing so as to reduce the volume conduction (the inﬂuence
of the neural activity of surrounding brain regions) on
the signals.

Similarly to what was done in the intracerebral EEG
recordings available to us (section 2.4), the simulated
LFP was also bandpass ﬁltered between 0.15Hz and
480Hz and downsampled to 1024Hz.

2.4 Inputs to the hippocampal model

The behavior of the model and its output are investi-
gated under two diﬀerent types of inputs, either stereo-
typical or realistic.

Stereotypical inputs are simply direct current in-
jected into all excitatory and inhibitory neurons of the
entorhinal cortex. To study the response of the model
to input variations, we applied a square wave current
Istim starting at t0 = 250ms of which we varied the
maximum value A1 as well as the frequency f1 across
simulations:

Istim(t) =

(cid:26) A1 if {t > t0 and sin(2πf1(t − t0)) ≥ 0}

0 otherwise.

(4)

The amplitude of the input A1 was chosen follow-
ing our work in [Aussel et al., 2021] on the healthy hip-
pocampus to best represent the slow-wave sleep (A1 =
1.2nA) and wakefulness (A1 = 0.8nA) behavior respec-
tively.

Realistic inputs were simulated as synaptic in-
puts to the neurons of the entorhinal cortex, using ex-
citatory synapses with the same conductance gmax,e as
within the network. Three groups of 10000 presynaptic
neurons (assumed to belong to brain regions projecting
onto the EC) were deﬁned, each of the groups being
connected to the neurons of a diﬀerent slice of the en-
torhinal cortex with a uniform probability of 0.05. The
presynaptic neurons were modeled as Poisson processes
with variable ﬁring rates (diﬀerent for the three groups,
but common within each group). In our realistic sim-
ulations, the varying Poisson ﬁring rate was extracted
from the envelope of real sEEG signals recorded in brain
regions aﬀerent to the hippocampus (see [Aussel et al.,
2018] for details).

2.5 Clinical electrophysiological data

As mentioned at the beginning of this section, we aim
to confront our model with real clinical data recorded
using sEEG electrodes implanted in human epileptic
subjects. In order to achieve this, real sEEG recorded
signals were used both to create a realistic model input
(as described in section 2.4) as well as to compare them
with the LFP model output (section 2.3).

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

7

RENATER and several Universities as well as other
organizations (see https://www.grid5000.fr). The
source code for the model is openly available on the
ModelDB platform ([McDougal et al., 2016]), at :
http://modeldb.yale.edu/266796.

2.7 Analysis method

We constructed our analysis in several steps.

2.7.1 Stereotypical inputs

Under stereotypical inputs, we have started by deﬁn-
ing the output characteristics of interest. In [Aussel
et al., 2021], we showed that our model is able to pro-
duce fast oscillatory patterns, with inter-pattern in-
terval mostly (but not only) determined by the fre-
quency of the stereotypical input. Since the human hip-
pocampus is also able to produce both fast oscillations
(gamma to fast ripple frequency range) and slow os-
cillations (delta to theta frequency range), we extract
from the LFP output of the model two frequency char-
acteristics:

– the mean frequency of the fast oscillatory patterns
ff ast, i.e. the mean of the peak of the LFP spectrum
in the 30-500Hz range (from gamma to ripple and
higher) for each of the fast patterns

– the standard deviation of the frequency of the fast
oscillatory patterns std(ff ast), i.e. the standard de-
viation of the peak of the LFP spectrum in the 30-
500Hz range (from gamma to ripple and higher) for
each of the fast patterns

– the peak frequency of LFP spectrum in the 1-30Hz
range fslow (from delta to gamma frequency, but
also including the theta frequency band), which cor-
responds to the inter-pattern frequency

After a ﬁrst evaluation of the behavior of the model,
it appeared that the fastest oscillations were obtained
for a square input of frequency f1 = 2.5Hz. Therefore,
this is the input frequency we use in section 3.1 to study
the ff ast and std(ff ast) characteristics of the model.
The fslow characteristic on the other hand was studied
by giving a constant input to the model and observing
the natural frequency of the resulting slow oscillations.
To assess the signiﬁcance of the ff ast and fslow
peaks in their respective frequency bands, we computed
their Z-scores (i.e. the number of standard deviation
above the mean of the spectrum in this frequency band
they were reaching): for the fast oscillations all the
peaks reported in the Results section reached a Z-score
of at least 7.5, and for the slow oscillations all the peaks
reported reached a Z-score of at least 4.5 (note that

Fig. 2 Coregistered CT-MRI image showing the implanta-
tion of SEEG electrodes in a patient’s hippocampi (frontal
view).

The LFP data we used was obtained from one in-
dividual presenting mesio-temporal refractory epilepsy
and implanted with deep intracerebral electrodes for
surgery planning at the Neurology Service of the
University Hospital (CHU) in Nancy, France. The
patient gave an informed consent for using data for
research purposes. The sEEG electrodes (Dixi Medical
®, France) had a diameter of 0.8mm, with 2mm-long
contacts and 1.5mm inter-contact distance, 8 to 15
contacts per electrode. The patient was implanted
according to phase 1 pre-surgical evaluation hypotheses
notably in the left prefrontal cortex,
left temporal
lobe and in both hippocampi (see Figure 2 for an
MRI reconstructed image of the bilateral hippocampal
implantation). Left hippocampus was found as being
the seizure onset zone. The position of the electrodes
in the patient’s brain was automatically ascertained
using a procedure described in [Hofmanis et al., 2011].
The signals were recorded using Micromed®, Italy
acquisition system. The sampling frequency was 1024
Hz. The signals of each patient were labelled by neu-
rologists (OA) in order to identify the diﬀerent stages
of the sleep-wake cycle (based on synchronous surface
EEG signal) as well as epileptic phenomena (interictal
or seizures). Data from both the slow-wave sleep and
wakefulness state was used.

2.6 Simulation tools

All the simulations were performed using the Brian2
libraries for Python ([Stimberg et al., 2014]), on
the Grid’5000 testbed, supported by a scientiﬁc in-
terest group hosted by Inria and including CNRS,

8

Am´elie Aussel et al.

lower Z-scores in the slow frequency band than in the
fast frequency band due to the 1/f shape of brain ac-
tivity). Therefore, all the selected peaks both in the fast
and slow frequency bands were highly signiﬁcant.

We have explored the space of the epileptic parame-
ters (spr, scl, EK and τCl). The dimension being rather
low, we could sample it regularly, performing a total
of 648 ﬁve-second long simulations, testing six diﬀerent
values of the parameters scl and spr and three diﬀerent
values of the parameters EK and τCl, under the sleep
and wakefulness conditions (we tested more diﬀerent
values of scl and spr compared to the other parameters
as these appeared to have a more signiﬁcant impact on
the resulting oscillations) 1. The results of these simu-
lations are presented in section 3.1. They complement
our previous work on the healthy hippocampus model
at the basis of the present work [Aussel et al., 2021, Aus-
sel et al., 2018].

2.7.2 Realistic setup

Once the healthy/epileptic models were systemat-
ically characterized using the stereotypical
inputs,
in a realistic context, by
we immersed our model
using realistic inputs and comparing it with the
measured hippocampal sEEG signals. We performed
648 two-minute long simulations.

For generating the inputs, we extracted the envelope
from the signals recorded by the electrodes located in
the posterior inferior gyrus in prefrontal cortex, the in-
ferior temporal gyrus in lateral temporal lobe and the
temporal pole, and generated the Poisson spike trains
as described above. The model output was compared
with one sEEG seizure recorded in the left hippocam-
pus, from the two most internal contacts of the elec-
trode depicted in the right (radiological consensus) in
ﬁgure 1-A.

For assessing the quality of the results under these
simulations, we used characteristics more speciﬁc than
simply the peaks in the high and low frequency bands
ff ast and fslow. More precisely, we focused on patho-
logical oscillatory patterns associated with seizures and
interictal epileptic discharges (IEDs).

In clinical context, seizures and IEDs are commonly
detected by visual inspection of the EEG or sEEG sig-
nals by an expert. Their automated detection is still an
active research ﬁeld and often relies on machine learn-
ing techniques to cluster the data into a physiological
and an epileptic set (see for example [Paul, 2018] for

1 For an alternative way of assessing the role of diﬀerent pa-
rameters in a higher dimensional parameter space, see [Aus-
sel et al., 2021], where we analyzed the healthy hippocampus
model.

the detection of seizures or [Gaspard et al., 2014] for
IEDs).

In this work, we chose to keep a classic clinical ap-
proach for the detection of pathological oscillations in
our simulated signals in order to be able to verify them
against real sEEG recorded seizure. Thus, seizure-like
theta episodes were characterized by an increase in the
power in the theta to alpha band (4-10Hz) as was shown
being characteristic for hippocampus seizures by [Naf-
tulin et al., 2018], [Perucca et al., 2014] in intracerebral
recordings.

Interictal spikes, sharp-wave ripples, and fast ripples
were detected by ﬁrst ﬁltering our simulated LFP in the
corresponding frequency bands (10-80Hz, 120-200 Hz
and 200-500Hz respectively), and computing the root
mean square envelope (RMS) of the resulting signals.
Events were then deﬁned as portions of LFP with RMS
higher than its mean value and with a peak at least
four times its standard deviation in at least one of the
deﬁned frequency band. IEDs were deﬁned as events
with a peak in the RMS of the 10-80Hz ﬁltered signal
but no peak in the ripple or fast ripple frequency ranges,
ripples were deﬁned as events with a peak in the RMS
of the 120- 200Hz ﬁltered signal but no peak in the fast
ripple frequency range, and fast ripples were deﬁned as
events with a peak in the RMS of the 200-500Hz ﬁltered
signal.

The analysis of the performances of the model in

this realistic setup is presented in section 3.2.

3 Results

3.1 Exploration of the epilepsy parameter space under
stereotypical inputs

In this section, we apply a stereotypical square-wave
input to our network to study the frequency of the os-
cillations it can produce under diﬀerent values of the
epilepsy parameters (recall that 648 simulations were
performed in total). It should be noted that though not
all possible combinations of parameters are biologically
plausible in a human hippocampus (for example, high
mossy ﬁber sprouting with no hippocampal sclerosis),
we are still sampling the complete parameter space in
order to get a deeper understanding of the role of each
parameter and their interactions. All simulations are
done for both sleep and wakefulness conditions, i.e. af-
ter setting the parameters of the (healthy) hippocam-
pus model at the values found in our previous works
and recalled in Table 1. Similarly to the structural pa-
rameters that were chosen for one of the two conditions
(sleep / wake), the input varied in amplitude, from high

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

9

amplitude for sleep (A1 = 1.2nA) to lower amplitude
(A1 = 0.8nA) for wakefulness.

3.1.1 The pathological model produces altered
oscillations under stereotypical inputs

Under stereotypical inputs, i.e. when stimulating en-
torhinal cortex neurons with a positive square current,
the LFP generated by the network shows coupled fast
and slow oscillations whose frequency varies with the
pathological parameters.

The evolution of the fast oscillations peak frequency
ff ast as a function of the four parameters spr, scl, EK
and τCl is shown on Figure 3-A for slow-wave sleep
and wakefulness respectively. Each subplot of this ﬁgure
shows in color the values of ff ast depending on spr and
scl, for ﬁxed values of EK and τCl, which correspond to
the line and column at which the subplot appears. The
point in the bottom-left corner of the bottom-left plot
therefore corresponds to a healthy hippocampus model.
This layout will be used again throughout this article
for the representation of other model outputs.

In both the slow-wave sleep and wakefulness modes,
high mossy ﬁber sprouting level comes with higher
frequency fast oscillations compared to the healthy
hippocampus. Reciprocally, high hippocampal sclerosis
tends to reduce the frequency of the fast oscillations
produced by the network.

This study of ff ast suggests that the fast ripple
oscillations observed in epileptic hippocampus exper-
imentally in wakefulness and slow-wave sleep could be
obtained in our model with high mossy ﬁber sprouting
level and rather low sclerosis level. An hyperexcitability
of the pyramidal neurons (controlled by the parameter
EK) would facilitate such pathological oscillations, es-
pecially in higher sclerosis settings. As for slower epilep-
tiform patterns such as interictal discharges (of fre-
quency typically less than 100Hz), these could be ob-
tained more easily with higher sclerosis levels and lower
mossy ﬁber sprouting level. However it should be noted
that the ff ast parameter does only reﬂect the highest
peak in the power spectrum in the 30-500Hz frequency
range and does not show if other signiﬁcant peaks are
present. This is why the presence of interictal activity
will be assessed more precisely in the next section with
realistic inputs.

The standard deviation of the ff ast frequency of the
network activity emerging from ten successive stimu-
lations is shown on Figure 3-B. From this, it can be
noted that when presented with an input consisting of
several stimulations with the same duration and am-
plitude, the network can respond with fast oscillatory
patterns at diﬀerent frequencies. This is especially true

for intermediate to high values of the scl, spr and EK
parameters, that is when the network is at the limit be-
tween a healthy and a fast pathological behavior. The
standard deviation of ff ast is also higher in the wakeful-
ness compared to the slow-wave sleep state. Because no
parameter was changed between successive simulations,
it is likely that the diﬀerent oscillatory frequencies re-
sult from a diﬀerent initial state of the network when
the stimulation starts (for example, the initial mem-
brane potential of neurons, which are set randomly),
and from the internal noise in the neuron models.

Epileptic features of the network inﬂuence the slow
frequency of the oscillations fslow as well (Figure 3-
C). More precisely, medium sclerosis values coupled to
healthy potassium dynamics enable the network to pro-
duce oscillations in the theta frequency band under
constant input during both wakefulness and slow-wave
sleep. Moreover, when potassium dynamics are altered
the network is even able to produce activity in the alpha
or low beta band with high sclerosis values.

It is interesting to notice that our experiments could
in principle be used for predicting the output of the
model for other parametrizations. Indeed, the relation-
ship between the fast oscillations frequency ff ast and
our four parameters can be estimated with a second or-
der polynomial function (with a least-square method).
This estimation yields a coeﬃcient of determination
R2 2 of 0.91 in the wakefulness mode and 0.89 in the
slow-wave sleep one. In both sleep and wakefulness, one
of the most important parameters is the mossy ﬁber
sprouting level spr, but the sclerosis level scl and the
potassium channel equilibrium potential EK also play
an important role, either on their own or squared or
jointly with other parameters (see Figure 4). The chlo-
ride dynamics altered by the τCl on the other hand only
play a minimal role.

3.1.2 Model saturates in extreme high sprouting - low
sclerosis conditions

Certain parameter values cause the network to saturate
after a few seconds, i.e. to produce continuous parox-
ystic neural spiking in all the regions of the model,
which does not stop even after all external input to the
network is removed. This abnormal activity ﬁrst arises
from CA3, which can be expected knowing that this
region is the one with highest recurrent excitation. The
LFP in this saturated state shows a peak in the fast
ripple frequency band (above 200Hz) in its spectrum.

(cid:80)N
(cid:80)N

2 R2 = 1 −

i=1(yi−ˆyi)2
i=1(yi−¯y)2 with y the observed values to esti-
mate, ¯y the mean of the observed values, ˆy the modeled values
and N the number of data points

10

Am´elie Aussel et al.

Fig. 3 Evolution of the frequency of the simulated LFP for diﬀerent values of spr, scl, EK and τCl. A- Fast oscillation
frequency ff ast under square input of amplitude A1 and frequency f1. Fast oscillations frequency reaches abnormally high
values during wakefulness for spr > scl. B- Standard deviation of the fast oscillation frequency ff ast under square input
of amplitude A1 and frequency f1. Fast oscillations frequency varies when the network is presented with successive
stimulations, all the more so with high EK , spr and scl. C- Slow oscillation frequency fslow under constant input of
amplitude A1. Under constant input, the network responds with slow oscillations in the delta to beta frequency band,
higher fslow values are obtained with high EK and scl. In each plot, the left panel shows results under slow-wave sleep
settings, while the right panel shows wakefulness settings. The input stimulation has frequency f1 = 2.5Hz and amplitude
A1 = 1.2nA for slow-wave sleep and f1 = 2.5Hz and A1 = 0.8nA for wakefulness.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

11

Fig. 4 Coeﬃcients measuring each parameter’s individual, squared or joint inﬂuence in the polynomial modeling of ff ast in
the wakefulness (upper panel) and slow-wave sleep mode (lower panel). The signiﬁcant coeﬃcients (p<0.01) are shown in red.

Overall, results in the next sections should be in-
terpreted with caution for areas of the parameter space
leading to such paroxystic activity, although it should
be noted that these areas (with excessive sprouting but
little to no sclerosis) are unlikely to be seen in a human
hippocampus in the ﬁrst place.

such

settings,

Under wakefulness

saturation
state only appears with high mossy ﬁber sprout-
ing level spr and low hippocampal sclerosis level
scl ((spr = 0.8,scl = 0),(spr = 1,scl = 0) or
(spr = 1,scl = 0.2)), which is consistent with an overall
epileptogenic eﬀect of sprouting ([Santhakumar et al.,
2005]) compared to a protective eﬀect of sclerosis
([Lopim et al., 2016]).

subset of

the parameters

During slow-wave sleep, this phenomenon arises
space,
from a smaller
that is with high pyramidal cell hyperexcitability
(EK = −80mV or higher), very high sprouting
(spr = 0.8 or higher), and no hippocampal sclerosis
(scl = 0). In conditions where instability appears only
in wakefulness,
it seems to arise from the modiﬁed
synaptic connectivity accompanying wakefulness (and
the increased excitatory synaptic strength in the den-
tate gyrus in particular), and not from the increased
CAN current (see Figure S2).

3.2 Exploration of the pathological parameter space
under realistic inputs

We next applied a realistic input to our network as de-
ﬁned in Section 2.4. More precisely, we chose portions
of signal from a patient having a seizure episode during
both slow-wave sleep and wakefulness to study the

appearance of seizure-like theta episodes in our model,
and portions of wakefulness and slow-wave sleep signal
from another patient without seizures for the study of
interictal events. It should be noted that, even though
the LFP signals used to compute the input were
recorded at the same time seizures or interictal events
occurred in the hippocampus, they did not include any
seizure nor interictal event themselves (as they were
recorded in the prefrontal cortex, the lateral temporal
lobe and the temporal pole, where no epileptic activity
was present, according to medical expertise).

3.2.1 Seizure-like theta activity appears under balanced
sclerosis and mossy ﬁber sprouting

Under wakefulness settings, it is possible for the model
to reproduce high amplitude theta oscillations with sim-
ilar temporal and frequency proﬁle as in clinical seizure
recordings, as shown on Figure 5-A-(a), except for the
fact that simulated theta episodes do not stop (which
is to be expected, since our model does not include
any internal seizure termination mechanisms). Increas-
ing the parameters spr or EK, or decreasing the param-
eter scl, tends to increase the amplitude and frequency
of the discharges in the seizure-like theta episode, to a
point where the model produces permanent seizure-like
theta discharges (i.e. that start at the very beginning of
a simulation, independently of the input). Conversely,
choosing parameters closer to a healthy state (Figure 5-
A-(b)) reduces the amplitude of the discharges and the
power in the theta band, to a point where the seizure-
like theta disappears (the increase in theta band power
at the start of the seizure being only due to an increase

12

Am´elie Aussel et al.

of the amplitude of the inputs given to the model). It
should also be noted that when stimulated with an in-
put recorded outside a seizure episode, the pathological
network produces isolated interictal events (see next
section) but no seizure-like theta episodes, as shown
on Figure 5-A-(c). In other words, both pathological
epilepsy-related parameters and seizure-related inputs
are needed for the model to reproduce this patient’s
seizure, which is why Figures 5-A-(b) and 5-A-(c) show
little resemblance to the patient’s seizure compared to
Figure 5-A-(a).

The ﬁring rates of the diﬀerent neuron groups
during the seizure-like theta episode with a patho-
logical model are shown in Supplementary Figure S3
(and an animation is also provided in Supplementary
Material), indicating that the theta patterns arise from
synchronous neural spiking, starting from the EC and
CA3 and then propagating to the DG and CA1. The
seizure-like theta activity in the simulated LFP occurs
when the input stimulation shows an increased power
in the theta to beta frequency bands, in accordance
with our previous results on stereotypical
inputs.
No signiﬁcant change occurs in the spectrum of the
simulated LFP before the beginning of the seizure-like
theta episode.

The total power in the theta band in the whole
seizure-like theta episode (Figure 5-B) is increased com-
pared to a healthy network when the sclerosis param-
eter scl is smaller than the sprouting parameter spr,
and is strongly reduced at higher sclerosis levels. The
amount of the increase in theta power in this region
of the parameter space is comparable to the clinical
recordings available to us (i.e., the seizure episode shows
an 11-fold increase in theta power compared to seizure-
free recordings). Under wakefulness settings, the neu-
ronal hyperexcitability controlled by EK is slightly in-
creasing the range of the spr and scl parameters en-
abling such high power in the theta band, thus mak-
ing the network more prone to generate epileptiform
theta activity. On the other hand, the slow-wave sleep
network shows only a moderated increase of its theta
band power in a highly sprouted compared to a healthy
case, which shows that this vigilance state has a rather
protective eﬀect against seizure-like theta episodes.

3.2.2 Both single-cell and network level pathological
parameters inﬂuence the production of interictal spikes
and fast ripple activity

It is possible for the network to produce high ampli-
tude, brief activity peaks similar to IEDs as shown on
Figure 6-A. These interictal spikes tend to appear when
a healthy slow-wave sleep network would produce large

amplitude, slow oscillations (see Figure 6-B). They are
more easily produced by a slow-wave sleep compared
to a wakefulness network, especially when the sclerosis
level scl is higher than the sprouting level spr (Figure
6-C). In wakefulness settings, the model predicts that
impaired potassium dynamics (i.e. high EK) enables
the production of an increased number of IEDs in the
high spouting, medium sclerosis region of the parameter
space.

Though the increased number of IEDs in the scl >
spr region of the parameter space was to be expected in
slow-wave sleep given our previous study of ff ast (Sec-
tion 3.1), the lower number of IED in wakefulness is
more surprising, but could be a consequence of the fact
that even with a peak ff ast frequency in the gamma
band, other faster oscillations also appear during high
amplitude events (in other words the network produces
fast ripples instead of IEDs, as will be shown there-
after).

The network is also able to reproduce fast ripples,
i.e. transient events with peak frequency higher than
physiological sharp-wave ripples (typically 200-500Hz),
such as the example shown on Figure 7-A. These events
can appear both in the slow-wave sleep and wakeful-
ness modes, though they are more numerous in simula-
tions in wakefulness settings (Figure 7-C). Wakefulness
fast ripples can emerge from almost any combination
of parameters, but are more numerous with high EK
or τCl and spr < scl. On the other hand, the number
of fast ripples under slow-wave sleep settings has a dif-
ferent proﬁle, being more consistently produced in the
spr > scl region of the parameter space, especially with
high τCl and low EK. In this ﬁgure, it should be noted
that in the region where EK = −80mV , spr is high and
scl = 0, the network is in a saturated state (see section
3.1.2) and therefore fast ripple events cannot be reli-
ably detected with our method, as oscillations within
the fast ripple band are continuously produced.

Under slow-wave sleep settings, the three parame-
ters spr, EK and τCl tend to increase the power in the
fast ripple band (see Figure 7-B), while increased sclero-
sis scl reduce it. It should be noted that the increased
power in the fast ripple band does not necessarily go
with a decrease in the power in the ripple band, which
is why the study of ff ast in Section 3.1 showed diﬀerent
results especially in the slow-wave sleep settings where
sharp-wave ripples are prominent.

4 Discussion

In this work, we have modiﬁed our previously devel-
oped healthy hippocampal model ([Aussel et al., 2018])
into an epileptic model, so as to take into account four

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

13

Fig. 5 Reproduction of seizure-like theta activity under realistic inputs. A-Comparison of the measured hippocampal LFP
and its theta band power around a seizure in a patient (blue) and the simulated LFP of the model (orange). Seizure-like
theta oscillations are obtained with the model using epilepsy-related abnormalities and inputs drawn from a patient
experiencing a seizure. Example A-(a): With spr=0.8, scl=0.6, EK = −90mV and τCl=0.5 second, and an input recorded
during a seizure. Example A-(b): With a healthy model (spr=0, scl=0, EK = −100mV and τCl=0.1 second), and an input
recorded during a seizure. Example A-(c): With spr=0.8, scl=0.6, EK = −90mV and τCl=0.5 second, and an input recorded
outside a seizure. All LFPs were normalized so that their maximum value before the start of the seizure is equal to 1. B-
Relative theta power of the simulated LFP compared to the healthy model, depending on the values of spr, scl, EK and τCl,
under sleep (left) or wakefulness (right) settings. The values shown are in log-scale, with the zero corresponding to the theta
band power in healthy conditions. The relative theta power of the individual with epilepsy in an epoch containing a seizure
compared to a seizure-free epoch is indicated on the color bar. The parameter values corresponding to the pathological and
healthy examples shown on panel A are indicated with the letters P and H respectively. High theta power close to patient’s
seizure can be obtained with the model under wakefulness settings and spr > scl.

hippocampal abnormalities usually associated with
epilepsy, that is hippocampal sclerosis (type I), mossy
ﬁber sprouting, impaired potassium dynamics (leading
to neuronal hyperexcitability), and impaired chloride
dynamics (leading to impaired inhibition).

These pathological features include both network
and single-cell dynamics for excitatory neurons, but it
should be noted that our model does not involve in-
terneuron pathologies, which may play a peculiar role
in epilepsy and seizure onset ([Chang et al., 2018], [Rich
et al., 2020]), as inhibition typically increases synchrony
in neuronal networks ([Diba et al., 2014]). Also, our
model does not tackle seizure initiation or termination
mechanisms, such as synaptic depletion (see the review
from [Lado and Mosh´e, 2008]). Such features will be left
for future works.

A study of the network’s behavior under stereotyp-
ical inputs reveals that very fast oscillations, as well as
saturation, can now be obtained, which was not pos-
sible with the ”healthy” model described in our previ-
ous works ([Aussel et al., 2021]). The wakefulness state
enhances the capacity of the network to produce such
saturated state, mostly due to the combined eﬀects of
mossy ﬁber sprouting and cholinergic modulation of
synaptic currents. Impaired potassium dynamics also

favor such abnormal activities, while hippocampal scle-
rosis has a rather protective eﬀect.

When stimulated with a realistic input, the modeled
network can also reproduce theta oscillations character-
istic of epileptic seizures as well as interictal spikes and
fast ripples. The timing of epileptic seizure-like theta
rhythms is in particular determined by the power in
the theta to beta frequency ranges in the stimulation
input given to the network.

Modeled seizure-like theta patterns closest to the
clinically recorded seizures can be obtained when
the degrees of sclerosis and mossy ﬁber sprouting are
properly balanced. High mossy ﬁber sprouting with low
hippocampal sclerosis leads to perpetual seizure-like
theta activity, while high sclerosis with low sprouting
suppresses the theta patterns. Interestingly, impaired
potassium and chloride dynamics have little inﬂuence
on the generation of theta seizures-like oscillations (at
least not directly, though the increased excitability and
fast spiking they induce can increase neuronal death
through excitotoxicity, see [Wang and Qin, 2010] or
[Deshpande et al., 2007], and can be involved in epilep-
togenesis). In accordance with clinical observations
(see [Crespel et al., 1998] or [Sedigh-Sarvestani et al.,
2014]), and as our study under stereotypical inputs

14

Am´elie Aussel et al.

Fig. 6 Interictal epileptiform discharges generated by the model. A- Example of an interictal discharge simulated with a
network in a slow-wave sleep state with spr = 0.6, scl = 0.6, EK = −90mV and τCl = 500ms. B- Comparison of the LFP
generated with a network in a slow-wave sleep state in ﬁve diﬀerent conditions, under the same input stimulation. Healthy
state : spr = 0, scl = 0, EK = −100mV and τCl = 100ms. EK + state : spr = 0, scl = 0, EK = −80mV and τCl = 100ms. τCl
+ state : spr = 0, scl = 0, EK = −100mV and τCl = 1s. scl + state : spr = 0, scl = 0.2, EK = −100mV and τCl = 100ms.
spr + state : spr = 0.2, scl = 0, EK = −100mV and τCl = 100ms. Increased τCl or scl give rise to an interictal discharge.
C- Number of interictal discharges obtained with a network under slow-wave sleep (left) or wakefulness (right) settings in a
one-minute-long simulation for diﬀerent values of spr, scl, EK and τCl. Highest number of interictal spikes can be obtained
with the model under slow-wave sleep settings and spr < scl.

suggested, theta oscillation characteristic of seizures
are more prominent in the model of wakefulness
compared to slow-wave sleep.

In the pathological model, interictal spikes are more
commonly produced under slow-wave sleep settings
than under wakefulness, especially in the presence
of hippocampal sclerosis. However, they can also be
produced during both sleep and wakefulness under
impaired potassium dynamics. Fast ripples on the
other hand are more commonly produced by the model
during wakefulness, but are also slightly favored during
slow-wave sleep if chloride dynamics are impaired. One
possible consequence of these results is that cognitive
impairments seen in individuals with epilepsy, and
promoted by interictal spikes and fast ripples ([Kleen
et al., 2013], [Krauss et al., 1997]), might be reduced
by targeting such chloride and potassium mechanisms.
This hypothesis could be further supported by experi-
ments conducted in mice where Kv1.1 ion channels are
aﬀected ([Thouta et al., 2021] in the amygdala).

Overall, we observed that the spr = scl hyperplane
of the parameter space plays a very important role
in the production of pathological oscillations. With
high spr and scl, it is possible to reproduce realistic

seizure-like theta oscillations as well as numerous
fast ripple oscillations during wakefulness. During
slow-wave sleep scl > spr increases the number of
interictal discharges while spr > scl favors fast ripple
oscillations. Impaired potassium and chloride dynamics
mostly inﬂuence the generation of interictal discharges
and fast ripples, but not the generation of seizure-like
theta activity (in the parameter range we studied).
Seizure-like theta episodes are mostly the result of the
abnormal structural connectivity induced by mossy
ﬁber sprouting and speciﬁc functional connectivity
of wakefulness. This is important as the role of
mossy ﬁber sprouting in epileptogenesis is debated
([Elm´er et al., 1997]). Our results are in accordance
with ([Isokawa et al., 1993]) and plead for a major
role of mossy ﬁber spouting in seizure genesis. This
supports further research on mossy ﬁber sprouting
as potential therapeutic target for mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy ([Cavarsan et al., 2018]). More, as mossy
ﬁber normal synaptogenesis was shown to be related
to long term spatial memory ([Ram´ırez-Amaya et al.,
2001]), higher rates of aberrant sprouting (as found in
our study) may support memory impairments found
in individuals with medial temporal epilepsy. Finally,

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

15

Fig. 7 Fast ripples generated by the network. A- Example of a fast ripple simulated with a network in a slow-wave sleep
state with spr = 0, scl = 0, EK = −90mV and τCl = 100ms, showing raw LFP trace (top) and power spectrum (bottom).
B-Comparison of the activity generated with a network in a slow-wave sleep state in ﬁve diﬀerent conditions, under the same
input stimulation generating a sharp-wave ripple like event, showing raw LFP traces (top) and power in the fast ripples
frequency band (bottom). Healthy state : spr = 0, scl = 0, EK = −100mV and τCl = 100ms. EK + state : spr = 0, scl = 0,
EK = −80mV and τCl = 100ms. τCl + state : spr = 0, scl = 0, EK = −100mV and τCl = 1s. scl + state : spr = 0, scl = 0.2,
EK = −100mV and τCl = 100ms. spr + state : spr = 0.2, scl = 0, EK = −100mV and τCl = 100ms. Parameters spr, EK
and τCl increase the power in the fast ripple band of healthy sharp-wave ripple complexes while scl decreases it. C-
Number of fast ripple oscillations obtained with a network under slow-wave sleep (left) or wakefulness (right) settings in a
one-minute-long simulation for diﬀerent values of spr, scl, EK and τCl. Highest number of fast ripples can be obtained
with the model under wakefulness settings with high Ek and τCl and spr < scl.

our study of interictal spikes and fast ripples shows
the importance of inhibition in spiking synchrony en-
hancement (as previous modeling studies [Giovannini
et al., 2017]). Therefore, large inhibition may lead to
high synchrony which in turn could yield increased
mossy ﬁber sprouting, and so on. This further suggests
that pharmacological treatments aiming at reinforcing
gabaergic inhibition that are largely used in clinical
approaches may not be the most suitable strategies to
avoid epilepsies which are, by deﬁnition, the behavioral
expression of abnormal synchronized neuronal activity.

5 Declarations

5.1 Funding

The authors have no funding to declare.

5.2 Conﬂicts of Interest

The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to declare.

5.3 Availability of data and code

All the Python source ﬁles used for building the net-
work and running the simulations are accessible on the
ModelDB public repositories.

5.4 Author Contributions

AA, LB and RR designed the study. SCC, LT and LM
collected the sEEG data. AA built the computational
model and performed the simulations. AA, LB, OA and
RR analyzed the results. AA drafted the paper. All au-
thors approved the ﬁnal manuscript.

16

References

Andersen et al., 2007. Andersen, P., Morris, R., Amaral, D.,
Bliss, T., and O’Keefe, J. (2007). The hippocampus book.
Oxford University Press.

Asadi-Pooya et al., 2017. Asadi-Pooya, A. A., Stewart,
G. R., Abrams, D. J., and Sharan, A. (2017). Preva-
lence and incidence of drug-resistant mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy in the United States. World Neurosurgery,
99:662–666.

Auer et al., 2020. Auer, T., Schreppel, P., Erker, T., and
Schwarzer, C. (2020).
Impaired chloride homeostasis in
epilepsy: Molecular basis, impact on treatment, and cur-
rent treatment approaches. Pharmacology & Therapeutics,
205:107422.

Aussel et al., 2021. Aussel, A., Buhry, L., and Ranta, R.
(2021). Design of experiments and sobol’ sensitivity anal-
ysis of a hippocampus computational model. In 2021 43rd
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine Biology Society (EMBC), pages 6146–6150.

Aussel et al., 2018. Aussel, A., Buhry, L., Tyvaert, L., and
Ranta, R. (2018). A detailed anatomical and mathemati-
cal model of the hippocampal formation for the generation
of sharp-wave ripples and theta-nested gamma oscillations.
Journal of Computational Neuroscience, 45(3):207–221.

(1989).

Babb et al., 1989. Babb, T., Pretorius, J., Kupfer, W.,
and Crandall, P.
Glutamate decarboxylase-
immunoreactive neurons are preserved in human epileptic
hippocampus. The Journal of Neuroscience, 9(7):2562–2574.
Bausch and McNamara, 2000. Bausch, S. B. and McNa-
mara, J. O. (2000).
Synaptic connections from multi-
ple subﬁelds contribute to granule cell hyperexcitability
in hippocampal slice cultures. Journal of Neurophysiology,
84(6):2918–2932.

Bl¨umcke et al., 2013. Bl¨umcke,

I., Thom, M., Aronica,
E., Armstrong, D. D., Bartolomei, F., Bernasconi, A.,
Bernasconi, N., Bien, C. G., Cendes, F., Coras, R., Cross,
J. H., Jacques, T. S., Kahane, P., Mathern, G. W., Miyata,
H., Mosh´e, S. L., Oz, B., ¨Ozkara, C¸ ., Perucca, E., Sisodiya,
S., Wiebe, S., and Spreaﬁco, R. (2013). International con-
sensus classiﬁcation of hippocampal sclerosis in temporal
lobe epilepsy: A task force report from the ILAE commis-
sion on diagnostic methods. Epilepsia, 54(7):1315–1329.
Buckmaster et al., 2002. Buckmaster, P. S., Zhang, G. F.,
and Yamawaki, R. (2002). Axon sprouting in a model of
temporal lobe epilepsy creates a predominantly excitatory
feedback circuit. The Journal of Neuroscience, 22(15):6650–
6658.

Cavarsan et al., 2018. Cavarsan, C. F., Malheiros,

J.,
Is mossy
Hamani, C., Najm, I., and Covolan, L. (2018).
ﬁber sprouting a potential therapeutic target for epilepsy?
Frontiers in Neurology, 9.

Chamma et al., 2012. Chamma, I., Chevy, Q., Poncer, J. C.,
and L´evi, S. (2012).
Role of the neuronal k-cl co-
transporter KCC2 in inhibitory and excitatory neurotrans-
mission. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 6.

Chang et al., 2018. Chang, M., Dian, J. A., Dufour, S.,
Wang, L., Chameh, H. M., Ramani, M., Zhang, L., Carlen,
P. L., Womelsdorf, T., and Valiante, T. A. (2018). Brief ac-
tivation of GABAergic interneurons initiates the transition
to ictal events through post-inhibitory rebound excitation.
Neurobiology of Disease, 109:102–116.

Coulter and Steinhauser, 2015. Coulter, D. A. and Stein-
hauser, C. (2015). Role of astrocytes in epilepsy. Cold Spring
Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 5(3):a022434–a022434.
Crespel et al., 1998. Crespel, A., Baldy-Moulinier, M., and
Coubes, P. (1998). The relationship between sleep and

Am´elie Aussel et al.

epilepsy in frontal and temporal lobe epilepsies: Practical
and physiopathologic considerations. Epilepsia, 39(2):150–
157.

Cressman et al., 2009. Cressman, J. R., Ullah, G., Ziburkus,
J., Schiﬀ, S. J., and Barreto, E. (2009). The inﬂuence of
sodium and potassium dynamics on excitability, seizures,
and the stability of persistent states: I. Single neuron dy-
namics. Journal of Computational Neuroscience, 26(2):159–
170.

Demont-Guignard et al., 2009. Demont-Guignard, S., Ben-
quet, P., Gerber, U., and Wendling, F. (2009). Analysis
of intracerebral EEG recordings of epileptic spikes: Insights
from a neural network model. IEEE Transactions on Biomed-
ical Engineering, 56(12):2782–2795.

Deshpande et al., 2007. Deshpande, L. S., Lou, J. K., Mian,
A., Blair, R. E., Sombati, S., and DeLorenzo, R. J. (2007).
In vitro status epilepticus but not spontaneous recurrent
seizures cause cell death in cultured hippocampal neurons.
Epilepsy Research, 75(2-3):171–179.

Diba et al., 2014. Diba, K., Amarasingham, A., Mizuseki,
K., and Buzsaki, G. (2014). Millisecond timescale syn-
chrony among hippocampal neurons.
Journal of Neuro-
science, 34(45):14984–14994.

Dyhrfjeld-Johnsen, 2008. Dyhrfjeld-Johnsen, J. (2008). Up-
regulated h-current in hyperexcitable CA1 dendrites after
febrile seizures. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 2.

Elm´er et al., 1997. Elm´er, E., Kokaia, Z., Kokaia, M., Lind-
vall, O., and McIntyre, D. C. (1997). Mossy ﬁbre sprouting:
evidence against a facilitatory role in epileptogenesis. Neu-
roreport, 8(5):1193–1196.

Fisher et al., 2014. Fisher, R. S., Acevedo, C., Arzi-
manoglou, A., Bogacz, A., Cross, J. H., Elger, C. E., En-
gel, J., Forsgren, L., French, J. A., Glynn, M., Hesdorﬀer,
D. C., Lee, B., Mathern, G. W., Mosh´e, S. L., Perucca, E.,
Scheﬀer, I. E., Tomson, T., Watanabe, M., and Wiebe, S.
(2014). ILAE oﬃcial report: A practical clinical deﬁnition
of epilepsy. Epilepsia, 55(4):475–482.

Fritschy et al., 1999. Fritschy, J.-M., Kiener, T., Bouilleret,
V., and Loup, F. (1999). GABAergic neurons and GABAA-
receptors in temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurochemistry Inter-
national, 34(5):435–445.

Gaspard et al., 2014. Gaspard, N., Alkawadri, R., Farooque,
P., Goncharova, I. I., and Zaveri, H. P. (2014). Automatic
detection of prominent interictal spikes in intracranial EEG:
Validation of an algorithm and relationsip to the seizure
onset zone. Clinical Neurophysiology, 125(6):1095–1103.
Gelinas et al., 2016. Gelinas, J. N., Khodagholy, D., Thesen,
T., Devinsky, O., and Buzs´aki, G. (2016). Interictal epilep-
tiform discharges induce hippocampal–cortical coupling in
temporal lobe epilepsy. Nature Medicine, 22(6):641–648.
Giovannini et al., 2017. Giovannini, F., Knauer, B., Yoshida,
M., and Buhry, L. (2017). The can-in network: A biologi-
cally inspired model for self-sustained theta oscillations and
memory maintenance in the hippocampus. Hippocampus,
27(4):450–463.

Hofmanis et al., 2011. Hofmanis, J., Caspary, O., Louis-
Dorr, V., and Maillard, L. (2011). Automatic depth elec-
trode localization in intracranial space. In 4th International
Conference on Bio-inspired Systems and Signal Processing,
Biosignals 2011, page CDROM, Rome, Italy.

Huberfeld et al., 2007. Huberfeld,

L.,
Clemenceau, S., Baulac, M., Kaila, K., Miles, R., and
Rivera, C. (2007). Perturbed chloride homeostasis and
GABAergic signaling in human temporal
lobe epilepsy.
Journal of Neuroscience, 27(37):9866–9873.

G., Wittner,

Isokawa et al., 1993. Isokawa, M., Levesque, M., Babb, T.,
and Engel, J. (1993). Single mossy ﬁber axonal systems of

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

17

human dentate granule cells studied in hippocampal slices
from patients with temporal lobe epilepsy [published erra-
tum appears in j neurosci 1993 jun;13(6):following table of
contents]. Journal of Neuroscience, 13(4):1511–1522.

Jinno and Kosaka, 2010. Jinno, S. and Kosaka, T. (2010).
Stereological estimation of numerical densities of gluta-
matergic principal neurons in the mouse hippocampus. Hip-
pocampus, 20(7):829–840.

Jiruska et al., 2014. Jiruska, P., De Curtis, M., and Jeﬀerys,
J. G. (2014). Modern concepts of focal epileptic networks.
Elsevier.

Jiruska et al., 2013. Jiruska, P., de Curtis, M., Jeﬀerys, J.
G. R., Schevon, C. A., Schiﬀ, S. J., and Schindler, K.
(2013). Synchronization and desynchronization in epilepsy:
controversies and hypotheses. The Journal of Physiology,
591(4):787–797.

Jochems and Yoshida, 2015. Jochems, A. and Yoshida, M.
(2015). A robust in vivo-like persistent ﬁring supported by
a hybrid of intracellular and synaptic mechanisms. PLOS
ONE, 10(4):e0123799.

Kleen et al., 2013. Kleen, J. K., Scott, R. C., Holmes, G. L.,
Roberts, D. W., Rundle, M. M., Testorf, M., Lenck-Santini,
P.-P., and Jobst, B. C. (2013). Hippocampal interictal
epileptiform activity disrupts cognition in humans. Neu-
rology, 81(1):18–24.

Krauss et al., 1997. Krauss, G. L., Summerﬁeld, M., Brandt,
J., Breiter, S., and Ruchkin, D. (1997). Mesial temporal
spikes interfere with working memory. Neurology, 49(4):975–
980.

Lado and Mosh´e, 2008. Lado, F. A. and Mosh´e, S. L. (2008).

How do seizures stop? Epilepsia, 49(10):1651–1664.

Lerche et al., 2012. Lerche, H., Shah, M., Beck, H., Noebels,
J., Johnston, D., and Vincent, A. (2012). Ion channels in
genetic and acquired forms of epilepsy. The Journal of Phys-
iology, 591(4):753–764.

Liou et al., 2020. Liou, J., Smith, E. H., Bateman, L. M.,
Bruce, S. L., McKhann, G. M., Goodman, R. R., Emerson,
R. G., Schevon, C. A., and Abbott, L. (2020). A model for
focal seizure onset, propagation, evolution, and progression.
eLife, 9.

Lopim et al., 2016. Lopim, G. M., Campos, D. V., da Silva,
S. G., de Almeida, A. A., Lent, R., Cavalheiro, E. A., and
Arida, R. M. (2016). Relationship between seizure fre-
quency and number of neuronal and non-neuronal cells in
the hippocampus throughout the life of rats with epilepsy.
Brain Research, 1634:179–186.

Mazzoni et al., 2015. Mazzoni, A., Lind´en, H., Cuntz, H.,
Lansner, A., Panzeri, S., and Einevoll, G. T. (2015). Com-
puting the local ﬁeld potential (lfp) from integrate-and-ﬁre
network models. PLOS Computational Biology, 11(12):1–38.
McDougal et al., 2016. McDougal, R. A., Morse, T. M.,
Carnevale, T., Marenco, L., Wang, R., Migliore, M., Miller,
P. L., Shepherd, G. M., and Hines, M. L. (2016). Twenty
years of ModelDB and beyond: building essential modeling
tools for the future of neuroscience. Journal of Computa-
tional Neuroscience, 42(1):1–10.

Morgan and Soltesz, 2008. Morgan, R. J. and Soltesz, I.
(2008). Nonrandom connectivity of the epileptic den-
tate gyrus predicts a major role for neuronal hubs in
seizures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(16):6179–6184.

Naftulin et al., 2018. Naftulin, J. S., Ahmed, O. J., Piantoni,
G., Eichenlaub, J.-B., Martinet, L.-E., Kramer, M. A., and
Cash, S. S. (2018). Ictal and preictal power changes outside
of the seizure focus correlate with seizure generalization.
Epilepsia, 59(7):1398–1409.

Netoﬀ, 2004. Netoﬀ, T. I. (2004). Epilepsy in small-world

networks. Journal of Neuroscience, 24(37):8075–8083.

Noebels et al., 2012. Noebels, J. L., Avoli, M., Rogawski,
M. A., Olsen, R. W., Delgado-Escueta, A. V., and Buck-
master, P. S. (2012). Jasper’s Basic Mechanisms of Epilep-
sies. Oxford University Press.

Pathak et al., 2007. Pathak, H. R., Weissinger,

O'Leary et al., 2013. O'Leary, T., Williams, A. H., Caplan,
J. S., and Marder, E. (2013). Correlations in ion channel ex-
pression emerge from homeostatic tuning rules. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(28):E2645–E2654.
F.,
Terunuma, M., Carlson, G. C., Hsu, F.-C., Moss, S. J.,
and Coulter, D. A. (2007). Disrupted dentate granule
cell chloride regulation enhances
synaptic excitability
during development of temporal lobe epilepsy. Journal of
Neuroscience, 27(51):14012–14022.

Patton and McNaughton, 1995. Patton, P. E. and Mc-
Naughton, B. (1995). Connection matrix of the hippocam-
pal formation: I. The dentate gyrus. Hippocampus, 5(4):245–
286.

Paul, 2018. Paul, Y. (2018). Various epileptic seizure detec-
tion techniques using biomedical signals: a review. Brain
Informatics, 5(2).

Perucca et al., 2014. Perucca, P., Dubeau, F., and Gotman,
Intracranial electroencephalographic seizure-
Brain,

J. (2014).
onset patterns: eﬀect of underlying pathology.
137(1):183–196. Publisher: Oxford Academic.

Pettersen et al., 2012. Pettersen, K. H., Lind´en, H., Dale,
A. M., and Einevoll, G. T. (2012). Extracellular spikes and
CSD. Handbook of neural activity measurement, 1:92–135.
Ram´ırez-Amaya et al., 2001. Ram´ırez-Amaya, V., Balderas,
I., Sandoval, J., Escobar, M. L., and Berm´udez-Rattoni, F.
(2001). Spatial long-term memory is related to mossy ﬁber
synaptogenesis. Journal of Neuroscience, 21(18):7340–7348.
Ratnadurai Giridharan et al., 2014. Ratnadurai Giridharan,
S., Stefanescu, R., Khargonekar, P., Carney, P., and Ta-
lathi, S. (2014). Genesis of interictal spikes in the ca1: a
computational investigation. Frontiers in Neural Circuits,
8:2.

Rich et al., 2022. Rich, S., Chameh, H. M., Lefebvre, J., and
Valiante, T. A. (2022). Loss of neuronal heterogeneity in
epileptogenic human tissue impairs network resilience to
sudden changes in synchrony. Cell Reports, 39(8):110863.
Rich et al., 2020. Rich, S., Chameh, H. M., Raﬁee, M., Fer-
guson, K., Skinner, F. K., and Valiante, T. A. (2020).
Inhibitory network bistability explains increased interneu-
ronal activity prior to seizure onset. Frontiers in Neural
Circuits, 13.

Santhakumar et al., 2005. Santhakumar, V., Aradi, I., and
Soltesz, I. (2005). Role of mossy ﬁber sprouting and mossy
cell loss in hyperexcitability: A network model of the den-
tate gyrus incorporating cell types and axonal topography.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 93(1):437–453.

Sedigh-Sarvestani et al., 2014. Sedigh-Sarvestani,

M.,
Thuku, G. I., Sunderam, S., Parkar, A., Weinstein, S. L.,
Schiﬀ, S. J., and Gluckman, B. J. (2014). Rapid eye move-
ment sleep and hippocampal theta oscillations precede
seizure onset in the tetanus toxin model of temporal lobe
epilepsy. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(4):1105–1114.

Stefanescu et al., 2012. Stefanescu, R. A., Shivakeshavan,
R., and Talathi, S. S. (2012). Computational models of
epilepsy. Seizure, 21(10):748–759.

Stimberg et al., 2014. Stimberg, M., Goodman, D. F., Beni-
choux, V., and Brette, R. (2014). Equation-oriented speci-
ﬁcation of neural models for simulations. Frontiers in Neu-
roinformatics, 8.

18

Am´elie Aussel et al.

Tejada and Roque, 2014. Tejada, J. and Roque, A. C.
(2014). Computational models of dentate gyrus with
epilepsy-induced morphological alterations in granule cells.
Epilepsy and Behavior, 38:63–70.

Thouta et al., 2021. Thouta, S., Zhang, Y., Garcia, E., and
Snutch, T. (2021). Kv1.1 channels mediate network ex-
citability and feed-forward inhibition in local amygdala cir-
cuits. Scientiﬁc Reports, 11.
van den Heuvel et al., 2019. van

den Heuvel, M. P.,
Scholtens, L. H., and Kahn, R. S. (2019). Multiscale
neuroscience of psychiatric disorders. Biological Psychiatry,
86(7):512–522.

Wang and Qin, 2010. Wang, Y. and Qin, Z. (2010). Molecu-
lar and cellular mechanisms of excitotoxic neuronal death.
Apoptosis, 15(11):1382–1402.

Wendling et al., 2002. Wendling, F., Bartolomei, F., Bel-
langer, J. J., and Chauvel, P. (2002). Epileptic fast ac-
tivity can be explained by a model of impaired GABAer-
gic dendritic inhibition. European Journal of Neuroscience,
15(9):1499–1508.

Wendling et al., 2012. Wendling, F., Bartolomei, F., Mina,
F., Huneau, C., and Benquet, P. (2012). Interictal spikes,
fast ripples and seizures in partial epilepsies - combining
multi-level computational models with experimental data.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 36(2):2164–77.

West and Gundersen, 1990. West, M. J. and Gundersen, H.
J. G. (1990). Unbiased stereological estimation of the num-
ber of neurons in the human hippocampus. The Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 296(1):1–22.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

19

S1 Supplementary Material : Modeling
hippocampal sclerosis as a loss of both
interneurons and excitatory neurons

S2 Supplementary Material : Saturating
network

S3 Supplementary Material : Firing rates
during a modeled seizure-like theta episode

20

Am´elie Aussel et al.

Fig. S1 Evaluation of the model with sclerosis (scl parameter) reducing the number of interneurons in the same proportion
as excitatory neurons. On each panel (A to F), an output of the model is evaluated depending on the values of spr, scl, EK
and τCl, under sleep (left) or wakefulness (right) settings. A- Fast oscillation frequency ff ast under stereotypical inputs. B-
Slow oscillation frequency fslow under stereotypical inputs. C- Standard deviation of the fast oscillation frequency ff ast under
stereotypical inputs. D- Relative theta power of the simulated LFP compared to the healthy model (log scale) under realistic
inputs. E- Number of interictal discharges under realistic inputs. F- Number of fast ripples under realistic inputs

Fig. S2 Network saturation appears with high sprouting and low sclerosis levels. Simulated LFP under a square current of
amplitude 1nA, with spr = 1, scl = 0.2, EK = −100mV and τCl = 0.01s, with low or high CAN channel conductance and
wakefulness or slow-wave sleep connectivity. The network saturates only with wakefulness connectivity.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

21

Fig. S3 A - Instantaneous ﬁring rates of the neurons in the model during a seizure-like theta episode. Top row - LFP of a
seizure-like theta episode simulated by the model with spr=0.6, scl=0.6, EK = −80mV and τCl=1 second under wakefulness
settings. Bottom four rows - Instantaneous ﬁring rates of the excitatory (orange) and inhibitory (blue) neurons in the EC,
DG, CA3 and CA1 regions of the model, in Hz. B - Instantaneous ﬁring rates of the excitatory neurons in the model during
one peak of a seizure-like theta episode, indicated with a black arrow on panel A.

