A hybrid computational model of the hippocampal
formation to replicate theta-nested gamma oscillations
and theta phase reset during neurostimulation
Nikolaos Vardalakis, Maeva Andriantsoamberomanga, Ankur Gupta, Amélie

Aussel, Nicolas P. Rougier, Fabien Bertrand Paul Wagner

To cite this version:

Nikolaos Vardalakis, Maeva Andriantsoamberomanga, Ankur Gupta, Amélie Aussel, Nicolas P.
Rougier, et al.. A hybrid computational model of the hippocampal formation to replicate theta-
nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset during neurostimulation. Federation of European
Neuroscience Societies (FENS), Jul 2022, Paris, France. 2023. ￿hal-03947275￿

HAL Id: hal-03947275

https://hal.science/hal-03947275

Submitted on 30 Jan 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

2/17/22, 2:38 PM

#1962: A hybrid computational model of the hippocampal formation to replicate theta-nested gamma...

Abstract 1962
A hybrid computational model of the hippocampal formation to replicate theta-nested gamma oscillations
andtheta phase reset during neurostimulation
Type:

Abstract Submission
S\_I. Computational and Theoretical Neuroscience / I.3 Conceptual modelling and pure theory / I.3.b
Neural network models

Topic:

Authors: Nikolaos Vardalakis1,2, Amélie Aussel1,2, Nicolas Rougier1,2, Fabien Wagner1; 1Université de

Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, Bordeaux, France, 2Inria BSO, Mnemosyne,
Talence, France

Abstract Body
Theta and gamma oscillations in the hippocampal formation play a crucial role in memory processes and are
disrupted in several neurological disorders. Recently, electrical neurostimulation of the human entorhinal area
has been shown to enhance memory encoding, but the underlying mechanisms need to be investigated. Here,
we aimed to validate the hypothesis that neurostimulation entrains theta-gamma oscillations and induces
phase reset of theta oscillations, through a novel hybrid computational model that replicates both theta-gamma
hippocampal oscillations and theta phase reset.

Specifically, we used an existing biophysically realistic model of the hippocampal formation able to generate
theta-nested gamma oscillations, and interfaced it with abstract Kuramoto oscillators that dynamically generate
theta oscillations and theta phase reset. Biophysically realistic neurons were modeled using the Hodgkin-
Huxley formalism and connected based on anatomical data from the literature. The set of Kuramoto oscillators
had reciprocal connections with the CA1 field of the hippocampus and was meant as an abstract
representation of the generation of hippocampal theta, which is thought to originate mainly from the medial
septum.

Our model replicates both theta-nested gamma oscillations and theta phase reset, and can be used to probe
the effects of different neurostimulation protocols on theta and gamma oscillations and their couplings. In
particular, we show that neurostimulation pulses delivered in-phase with the underlying theta rhythm can
rescue impaired oscillations caused by changes in the model parameters that reflect pathophysiological circuit
alterations.

Overall, our novel computational framework opens new avenues for studying the effects of neurostimulation on
hippocampal circuits

Print

https://cpaper.ctimeetingtech.com/fens22/submission/preview/print?publication\_id=1962

1/1

 
