Postsynaptic dysfunction is associated with spatial and
object recognition memory loss in a natural model of
Alzheimer’s disease.
Alvaro O Ardiles, Cheril C Tapia-Rojas, Madhuchhanda Mandal, Frédéric

Alexandre, Alfredo Kirkwood, Nibaldo C Inestrosa, Adrian G Palacios

To cite this version:

Alvaro O Ardiles, Cheril C Tapia-Rojas, Madhuchhanda Mandal, Frédéric Alexandre, Alfredo Kirk-
wood, et al.. Postsynaptic dysfunction is associated with spatial and object recognition memory loss
in a natural model of Alzheimer’s disease.. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 2012, 109 (34), pp.13835-40. ￿10.1073/pnas.1201209109￿. ￿hal-00746807￿

HAL Id: hal-00746807

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00746807

Submitted on 29 Oct 2012

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

Biological Sciences, Neuroscience 

Post-synaptic dysfunction is associated with spatial and object recognition 

memory loss in a natural model of Alzheimer’s disease 

Álvaro O. Ardiles\*, Cheril C. Tapia-Rojas‡, Madhuchhanda Mandal†, Frederic 
Alexandre§, Alfredo Kirkwood1†, Nibaldo C. Inestrosa‡ & Adrian G. Palacios1\* 

\*Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Facultad de Ciencias, 
Universidad de Valparaíso, 2360102 Valparaíso, Chile. 

†Mind/Brain Institute and Department of Neurosciences, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA. 

§Centre de Recherche Inria Bordeaux - Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, F-
33076 Bordeaux, France. 

‡Centro de Envejecimiento y Regeneración, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile, 8331010 Santiago, Chile. 

1Corresponding Authors 

Adrian G Palacios, Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Facultad de 
Ciencias, Universidad de Valparaíso, 2360102 Valparaíso, Chile. 
Email: adrian.palacios@uv.cl 

Alfredo Kirkwood Mind/Brain Institute and Department of Neurosciences, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA 
Email: kirkwood@jhu.edu 

Author Contributions. AOA, MM and CT performed experiments and contribute to 

figures. FA contributed with analytic tools. AGP, AK, NI and AOA designed the research 

and wrote the paper. 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an age-related neurodegenerative disorder associated with 

progressive memory loss, severe dementia, and hallmark neuropathological markers such 

as deposition of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides in senile plaques and accumulation of 

hyperphosphorylated tau proteins in neurofibrillary tangles. Recent evidence obtained 

from transgenic mouse models suggests that soluble, non-fibrillar A(cid:533) oligomers may 

induce synaptic failure early in AD. Despite their undoubted value, these transgenic 

models rely on genetic manipulations that represent the inherited, familial, but not the 

most abundant, sporadic form of AD. A non-transgenic animal model that still develops 

hallmarks of AD would be an important step toward understanding how sporadic AD is 

initiated. Here we show that starting between 12 and 36 mo of age, the rodent Octodon 

degus naturally develops neuropathological signs of AD, such as accumulation of Aβ 

oligomers and phosphorylated tau proteins. Moreover, age-related changes in Aβ 

oligomers and tau phosphorylation levels correlate with decreases in spatial and object 

recognition memory, postsynaptic function, and synaptic plasticity. These 

findings validate Octodon degus as a suitable natural model to study how sporadic AD 

may be initiated. 

2

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

/body 

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an age-related neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the 

accumulation of abnormally processed proteins in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and senile 

plaques (1). These lesions are present in both familial and sporadic forms of AD. Familial 

AD is linked to inherited mutations in AD-related genes and represents a small percentage 

of AD cases, while sporadic AD represents the vast majority of cases and is not inherited. 

Results from transgenic mice bearing mutations in APP, Psen1/2, and Tau show synaptic 

dysfunction in early stages of AD, before overt neurodegeneration (2, 3). More recent 

studies have underscored a critical role for soluble Aβ oligomers as an early trigger for AD, 

and they have been associated with memory and neural plasticity loss (4-8). 

Although transgenic mice have been extremely useful in elucidating the pathological 

mechanisms of AD, there have been substantial limitations. Several examples are the 

absence of tau mutations linked to AD, except for a triple transgenic mouse 3xTg-AD, 

bearing mutations for APP, Psen1/2, and Tau (9), the inability to develop the whole 

spectrum of the disease, the overexpression of transgenes into a non physiological scenario, 

and the fact that the manipulated genes represent only familial, and not sporadic forms of 

AD (10, 11). It would be highly desirable to have a non-transgenic model of AD to 

complement those that already exist. Several species naturally develop features of AD with 

age; however, their usefulness is still limited as they do not exhibit the full spectrum AD-

related alterations (12-14). For example the Aβ peptide sequences of Cavia porcellus 

(guinea pig) and Microcebus murinus are similar to that of human (15, 16), but the first 

fails to develop senile plaques and NFTs (15) and experiments examining synaptic function 

and memory have not been carried out in such models. A promising candidate model for 

3

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

sporadic AD is the rodent Octodon degus (degus) which naturally develops the 

histochemical hallmarks of AD, including intra and extracellular accumulation of amyloid 

plaques, tau deposition in NFT (17), along with hippocampal disconnection and brain 

parenchyma pathology (18). Prompted by these preliminary observations, we examined the 

neuropathological spectrum of AD in degus. Here we report that degus exhibits an age-

related accumulation of soluble Aβ oligomers and tau protein phosphorylation that 

correlates with cognitive decline in spatial (T-maze) and object recognition (ORM) 

memory, as well as synaptic and neural plasticity dysfunction. Based on these findings we 

propose that i) Aβ dodecamers (Aβ\*56), may associate with phosphorylated tau proteins, 

constituting an early candidate for the neural toxicity and synaptic dysfunction that occurs 

before the appearance of fibrillar forms of Aβ, which are common to familial and sporadic 

forms of AD and ii) degus is a suitable non-transgenic model of sporadic AD. 

Results 

The degree of neuropathology was evaluated at the behavioral, synaptic, and molecular 

level in degus at different ages. This approach allowed us to establish interpretative 

correlations to identify those animals suffering from AD (See Table S2). 

Age-related cognitive decline during aging in Octodon degus 

We first evaluated memory capacity with ORM and T-maze tests in 6, 12, 36, and 60 

month old (mo) degus. The results show no significant difference between 6 and 12 mo or 

36 and 60 mo degus and therefore animals were considered as young (6 and 12 mo) and 

aged (36 and 60 mo) (Fig. 1B and D). In the T-maze, the aged degus showed a decreased 

4

 
 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

performance compared to young degus (Fig. 1A-B; ANOVA, p < 0.0001). In the ORM, 

aged degus explored less (total time and number of visits) and had longer latency than 

younger animals (Table S1). Moreover, unlike young degus, aged degus did not show a 

preference between new and familiar objects (Fig. 1C-D; t-test p < 0.0001). In general, we 

observed an age dependent decline in memory performance beginning at 36 mo and 

maintained through 60 mo (Fig. 1B). 

Selective postsynaptic dysfunction induces impairments in synaptic transmission and 

plasticity. 

We next examined the synaptic basis of these learning deficits by evaluating the strength 

and plasticity of the CA3-CA1 synapses in hippocampal slices prepared from behaviorally 

tested individuals. Basal excitatory synaptic transmission was reduced in aged degus 

compared to young degus (Fig. 2A1; ANOVA, p < 0.0001). Importantly, the fEPSP slopes, 

but not fiber volley amplitude, were significantly reduced in aged animals (Fig. 2A2-A3; 

repeated measures ANOVA, p < 0.0001). This is consistent with findings reported in AD 

mouse models overexpressing mutant forms of APP (19, 20) (see (21) for a review). The 

reduced transmission could be due to a reduced postsynaptic responsiveness or to a reduced 

probability of neurotransmitter release. We ruled out the latter possibility because no 

difference in the paired-pulse facilitation ratio was observed (Fig. 2B1-B2; 2-way ANOVA, 

p > 0.05). To confirm the likely postsynaptic basis for the reduced fEPSPs, we recorded 

AMPA receptor (AMPAR)-mediated miniature EPSCs (mEPSCs). Consistent with 

previous reports in AD models (22, 23), we found that the amplitude but not the frequency 

of mEPSCs was significantly reduced in aged degus (Fig. 2C1-C3; t-test, p < 0.01), 

5

 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

suggesting a change in AMPAR function or number. The electrophysiological analysis 

indicated that aging preferentially affects postsynaptic processes in degus. Therefore, we 

further assessed the integrity of pre- and postsynaptic elements by measuring the levels of 

critical synaptic proteins extracted from hippocampal slices by Western blot. We found a 

selective reduction in PSD-95, AMPAR subunit GluR2, and NMDA receptor (NMDAR) 

subunit NR2B expression (Fig. 3A-B; ANOVA, p < 0.05), but not of synaptophysin in 

accordance with the observation that measures of presynaptic function (FV and PPF) are 

not affected in aged degus (Fig. 2A2 and B1). These data support the observation that 

postsynaptic integrity is more vulnerable in aged degus. 

Next we assessed whether synaptic plasticity was affected at the CA3-CA1 synapses of the 

aged degus. We measured long-term potentiation (LTP) induced with theta-burst 

stimulation (TBS) and long-term depression (LTD) induced with paired pulse-low 

frequency stimulation (ppLFS). The LTP amplitude in aged degus was significantly 

decreased after 60 min compared to that of young degus (Fig. 4A; 2-way ANOVA, p < 

0.0001), whereas LTD was slightly but significantly increased in aged degus compared to 

young (Fig. 4B, 2-way ANOVA, p < 0.0001). Prompted by the fact that neural plasticity 

was similar in the 36 and 60 mo age groups, suggesting a decrease in the progression of 

neurodegeneration, we examined an additional group of 72 mo degus. At this age, LTP 

continues to decrease and LTD to increase (Fig. S1A) indicating a further progression of 

the neuropathology associated with AD. 

Synaptic plasticity measurements were recorded in behaviorally characterized degus, 

raising the possibility that synaptic modifications induced during the learning tasks might 

have affected the subsequent induction of LTP and LTD in slices (24). However, the 

6

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

magnitude of LTP and LTD were similar (Fig. S4C-D) in slices from naïve and trained 

degus, indicating that the effects of previous behavioral testing were minimal. 

Increased soluble Aβ oligomers and tau phosphorylation in aged degus. 

Growing evidence establishes that soluble Aβ oligomers are involved in synapse and 

memory impairments in AD (5-7). To identify the nature of different types of Aβ species in 

hippocampal extracts from young and aged degus, we used a specific mouse anti- Aβ 

peptide 4G8, followed by immunoblotting (7). Both young and aged degus show similar 

forms of small Aβ peptides, such as trimers (∼12 KDa), tetramers (∼16 KDa), and 

hexamers (∼27 kDa), while aged degus displayed higher levels of Aβ dodecamers (∼56 

kDa) (Fig. 5A1-A2). The presence of these Aβ dodecamers in the hippocampus was 

confirmed by a slot blot assay using the specific antioligomeric antibody A11, which 

detects soluble amyloid assemblies larger than 40 kDa (25). Aged degus showed greater 

levels of larger Aβ oligomers (A11) when compared to young degus (Fig. 5B). 

The number and localization of NFT, but not senile plaques, has been correlated with levels 

of dementia in AD patients (26). In order to search for the presence of NFTs, we measured 

tau phosphorylation at sites known to be present in paired helical filaments (PHFs). The 

PHF-1 antibody detects tau phosphorylation at serine residues 396 and 404 (27). Aged 

degus show an increase in the phosphorylation levels detected by this antibody compared to 

young degus (Fig. 5C). A similar result was obtained by using AT8 antibody, which detects 

tau phosphorylation at serine 202 and threonine 205 (28), Tau phosphorylation at these 

sites was only slightly greater in aged degus, including 72 mo degus (Fig. S1B-C), 

compared to young degus (Fig. 5C). The increase in tau phosphorylation was not simply 

7

 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

due to an increase in tau protein levels. Fig. S1 (B-C) shows that the total tau level (Tau-5) 

remains unchanged up to 72 mo. Furthermore, pathological phosphorylated tau begins to 

appear first in the cortex and then in the hippocampus, where neurons containing 

hyperphosphorylated tau were preferentially detected in aged degus (Fig. 7 and S5, also see 

Fig. 1 in (17)). 

Increased levels of soluble Aβ oligomers and tau phosphorylation correlate with 

behavioral impairment and reduced synaptic plasticity. 

Table S2 shows that the 12mer dodecamer (Aβ\*56) is highly negatively correlated with 

LTP magnitude (r2 = 0.31, p = 0.0012; Fig. 6A), and performance in Tmaze (r2 = 0.24, p = 

0.0048; Fig. 6B), and ORM (r2 = 0.34, p = 0.0006; Fig. 6C) tasks. Similarly, higher levels 

of PHF-1 correlate with lower levels of LTP (r2 = 0.28, p = 0.0020, Fig. 6D), ORM (r2 = 

0.37, p = 0.0003; Fig. 6F), and to a lesser degree with T-maze (r2 = 0.19, p = 0.0138; Fig. 

6E) performance. Comparable correlations were obtained when A11 and AT8 were 

compared with LTP, T-maze, and ORM performance (Fig. S2). Further analysis using 

Principal Component Analysis is presented in supplementary information. 

Although these results suggest a similar time course and a plausible causal link between the 

increase in soluble Aβ oligomers, phosphorylated tau, and the incidence of synaptic and 

cognitive alterations, we cannot rule out the possibility that insoluble amyloid fibrils also 

participate in this cascade of neurotoxic events. For this reason, we analyzed the presence 

of amyloid deposition by immunohistochemistry and Thioflavine S (ThS) staining (Fig. 7 

and S5). Amyloid plaques were almost absent in young degus and began to appear in the 

cortex of aged degus at 36-60 mo, whereas plaques did not appear in the hippocampus until 

8

 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

over 60 mo (Fig. S5). Just as with ThS-positive plaques, extracellular Aβ immunoreactivity 

(Fig. 7I) and pathological phosphorylated tau was first observed in the cortex at 36 mo, and 

later in the hippocampus after 60 mo (Fig. 7J). 

Results here indicate that during aging, degus develop a neurodegenerative AD-like 

condition. In the initial stages, increased A(cid:533) oligomers and phosphorylated tau levels could 

explain the impairments in learning, memory, and neural plasticity capacities; whereas in 

later stages (after 72 mo), progressive deposition of plaques and tangles, likely leading to 

neurodegeneration, occurs which could aggravate or accelerate the symptomatology of AD 

in degus (Fig. 7, S1, S5). 

Throughout this study we noted that the behavioral, functional, and molecular alterations 

did not proceed at a uniform pace during aging. Rather, most of the changes occurred 

between 12 and 36 mo. To identify the most critical factors involve in the progression of 

AD, we performed a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Table S2; variables with 

correlation ≥ 0.50: LTP, Tmaze, ORM, Aβ\*56, PHF1, GluR2, and NR2b). Interestingly, 

the plot in the space of the first two principal components (PC1 vs PC2) clearly segregates 

two different classes of individuals: young and aged degus (Table S4, Fig. S3), supporting 

the importance of the variables examined here. Finally, it is important to note that although 

most of the deficits develop between 12 and 36 months, the changes are not homogeneous 

in this population. About 25% of individuals aged 36-months exhibit “unimpaired” 

performance either in the spatial or the object recognition memory test (59). This variability 

would be expected for a group of non-transgenic animals where the genetic background 

comes from a controlled but natural population. 

9

 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

Discussion 

Synaptic and cognitive dysfunction in AD models has revealed significant impairments 

before neurodegeneration becomes evident (19, 20, 22, 23). We show here a clear 

correlation between high levels of A(cid:533)\*56 oligomers and tau phosphorylation with the 

reduction of synaptic strength and plasticity (Fig. 6 and S3). However, the exact mechanism 

by which A(cid:533) oligomers or phosphorylated tau might impair synaptic function is still under 

debate. Some studies have reported that the addition of A(cid:533) oligomers is sufficient to impact 

synaptic function in vitro (5, 29, 30) as well as alter cognitive function (7, 31). Other 

studies provide evidence that chemical reactions occurring during the process of A(cid:533) 

aggregation produce toxic species like reactive oxygen species (32, 33). In that context, 

degus could provide a valuable “natural model” to test toxicity mechanisms. 

Recent evidence suggests that soluble A(cid:533) oligomers (also referred to as ADDLs) may 

induce synaptic failure as an early event related to memory deficits in AD (6, 34). Indeed, it 

has been observed that soluble Aβ particular affects synapses by selectively targeting 

postsynaptic components (34, 35). More recently it has been reported that cellular prion 

protein (PrPC) functions as a receptor for Aβ oligomers (36). Once bound to the membrane, 

these oligomers tend to accumulate at excitatory synapses forming clusters with 

metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR5) causing impairments in synaptic plasticity 

(37). Many different lengths and conformational states of Aβ peptide are generated during 

its biosynthesis, including highly mobile soluble A(cid:533) oligomers, pre-fibrillar, and fibrillar 

aggregates. These diverse assemblies have been associated with the disruption of memory 

and synaptic plasticity. For instance, dimers (8, 38), trimers (39) and dodecamers (7), 

derived from diverse sources (including chemical synthesis, transfected cells, and mouse 

10

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

and human AD brains), potently impair synaptic plasticity and memory. However, it has 

been showed that Aβ\*56, compared to others assemblies, has the greatest effect on memory 

(7, 40, 41) and has been proposed to be the key neurotoxic non-fibrillar assembly in AD 

because it is highly stable and prone to aggregate (42). In the same way, we observed in 

degus a stronger inverse relationship between increasing levels of Aβ\*56 and LTP, T-maze, 

and ORM performance, which becomes more severe during aging (Fig. 6). Strikingly, aged 

degus also show an increase in the levels of phosphorylated tau (Fig. 5C, S5), suggesting a 

functional link between Aβ processing and tau phosphorylation, since phosphorylated tau 

residues also negatively correlate with LTP and cognitive impairments (Fig. 6). Several 

reports have shown that in the hippocampus of mice, an increase in soluble Aβ by local 

administration increases the level of phosphorylated tau proteins, producing cognitive 

impairments (43-45). Furthermore when both proteins decrease, a recovery of cognitive 

abilities was observed (44). Interestingly, direct interaction between tau proteins and Aβ 

peptides induces tau aggregation and hyperphosphorylation (45). Furthermore, it has 

recently been shown that A(cid:533) oligomers cause missorting and phosphorylation of tau (46), 

microtubule destabilization, and axonal transport disruption (47). On the other hand, Aβ-

induced impairments in LTP are mediated by tau phosphorylation suggesting that tau 

proteins are one element required for the synaptotoxic effects of Aβ oligomers (48). 

Age-related reductions in spontaneous and evoked AMPAR-mediated currents have also 

been observed in AD models, which are attributed to a reduction in the number of these 

receptors (22, 23). We did not observe differences in the frequency of mEPSCs, suggesting 

that in 60 mo degus the number of functional synapses is not reduced. However, a possible 

explanation for the observed decrease in mEPSCs amplitude is that the content of AMPARs 

11

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

available for trafficking is impaired in aged degus. Certainly, Aβ peptides prevent 

recruitment and anchoring of AMPARs to the postsynaptic compartment by reducing 

CAMKII activation and distribution as well as PSD-95 levels (49-51). Together, these 

results suggest that postsynaptic compartments are more susceptible to the effects of Aβ 

peptides than are presynaptic elements, considering that both PSD-95 and glutamate 

receptors were reduced in aged degus (Fig. 2 and 4). However, presynaptic mechanisms 

cannot be totally excluded since APP (23), Aβ (52), and presenilin (1/2) (53) have been 

reported to be localized presynaptically. 

An interesting comparison can be made between degus and the 3xTg-AD mice (9). In both 

models, the decline in synaptic plasticity can be associated with an increase in Aβ peptides 

before an increase in tau phosphorylation occurs. Since this process occurs naturally in 

degus, it represents a unique opportunity to test for physiological mechanism and rescue 

therapies during sporadic AD. 

Another motivating comparison here is with Microcebus murinus, a small nocturnal 

primate living 8-14 years old in captivity in which 20% of elderly adults show 

neurodegenerative hallmarks of spontaneous AD, including brain amyloid plaques, tau 

pathology, decrease of ACh neurons, and behavioral failures with loss of sensory and 

cognitive functions (review in (16)). As in microcebus, 72 mo degus develops a discrete 

number of Aβ deposits, which are first detectable in the cortex and subsequently in the 

hippocampus (Fig. 7 and S5, also see Fig.1 in (17)). We have also established changes in 

neural plasticity (LTP, LTD) in degus that correlate with the presence of soluble Aβ 

oligomers and phosphorylated tau proteins. 

12

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

A recurrent and difficult question to address while studying neurodegeneration is its close 

association with the natural aging process. For example, aged rats show a modest decrease 

in basal synaptic transmission, NMDAR-mediated response, and deficits in synaptic 

plasticity (54-56) similar to the decreases in both synaptic transmission and plasticity (Fig. 

2 and 3) seen in degus. However, aged rats do not show a decrease in spatial (T-maze) (56) 

or ORM performance (57, 58), which is clearly different from the performance observed in 

degus (Fig. 1). 

Together, our findings suggest that degus provides a strong and naturalistic model to study 

early neurodegenerative process associated with sporadic AD. It is worth mentioning that 

degus can live around 9-10 years in captivity, so the present work represents only half of a 

degus lifespan. Finally, while the precise mechanism remains unclear, our data are 

consistent with the idea that soluble Aβ oligomers at pre-fibrillar stages can act as toxic 

ligands at postsynaptic compartments, driving the synaptic and memory disruption 

observed in early AD models. 

Materials and methods 

See SI Material and Methods for detailed information about all techniques used here. 

Animals: Octodon degus were obtained from a breeding colony at the Animal facility of 

the Universidad de Valparaiso (Approved Animal Welfare Assurance NIH A5823-01). 

Protocols: We submitted the different groups of degus to a complete characterization 

including, behavioral tests, electrophysiological recordings and biochemical measures. All 

of animals, regardless of age, received the same manipulations: before evaluating their 

cognitive capacity, we first habituate the animals to an open field over 5 consecutive days; 

13

 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

next, degus were submitted to an object recognition memory test for 5 days and then to a T-

maze test for 17 days. Once the behaviorally characterization was complete, degus were 

sacrificed to obtain hippocampal slices from which to study synaptic transmission and 

plasticity. After completion of the electrophysiological experiments, hippocampal slices 

were immediately frozen for biochemical characterization. We later collected all the tissue 

to obtain homogenates from the hippocampus to quantify different proteins levels by 

immunoblotting. 

Behavioral tests. Object recognition memory (ORM) was assessed with an open field 

arena made of black plexiglass (50 cm × 40 cm × 63 cm) during 5 days. Each ORM session 

consisted of three phases (180 sec each one): (i) Familiarization where degus explored a 

pair of identical objects; (ii) Retention where the degus is removed for object cleaning and 

changing; (iii) Recognition where degus explored a pair of different objects: a familiar 

object (FO) (extra copy of familiar object) and a novel object (NO). To quantitate OMR, a 

preference index (PI) was calculated by computing PI = NO / NO+FO. Spatial working 

memory was assessed in a T-maze task using a training protocol to search for a reward 

during 12 consecutive days. Each session consisted of 10 trials composed of three parts (60 

sec each): (i) forced choice memory learning, with no food reward and where one arm 

remained closed; (ii) retention time, where the animal was removed for cleaning and the 

closed arm was opened; (iii) free choice for memory recognition, where the two arms are 

open and the reward was placed in the previously closed arm. A correct response 

corresponded to a visit to the closed arm during (i), in which case the animal was rewarded 

with a sunflower seed. 

14

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

Electrophysiology: Extracellular and whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were performed 

in hippocampal slices from behaviorally characterized degus as described (54, 55). 

Immunoblotting: Proteins were run on gradient, denaturing gels, blotted, and probed with 

appropriate antibodies. 

Histology: PFA-fixed brains were sectioned into 20µm slices and free-floating slides were 

processed following immunohistochemical and ThS staining procedures. 

Statistics: All data are presented as mean ± standard error or deviation of the mean (S.E.M. 

or S.D.). Data analysis was carried out using Prism software (GraphPad Software Inc). 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank H.K. Lee and A. Megill (Hopkins U), J. Ewer (U 

Valparaiso), A. Chavez (A Einstein), A. Reichenbach (U Leipzig), L. Peichl (Max Planck) 

for discussion and comments, C. Elgueta (U Freiburg) for software assistance and T. Lee 

(U Michigan) for degus specimen in USA. This work was supported by NIH-FIRCA R03 

TW007171-01A1 and R01AG034606 (AK), ANR-47 CONICYT (AP, FA), CONICYT-

PFB 12/2007 (NI), CINV ICM P09-022-F (AP), Fellowship CONICYT AT-24091109 

(AOA). 

15

 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

References 

Selkoe DJ (2001) Alzheimer's disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol Rev 
81(2):741-766. 
Gotz J & Ittner LM (2008) Animal models of Alzheimer's disease and 
frontotemporal dementia. Nat Rev Neurosci 9(7):532-544. 
Philipson O, et al. (2010) Animal models of amyloid-beta-related pathologies in 
Alzheimer's disease. FEBS J 277(6):1389-1409. 
Jacobsen JS, et al. (2006) Early-onset behavioral and synaptic deficits in a mouse 
model of Alzheimer's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(13):5161-5166. 
Selkoe DJ (2008) Soluble oligomers of the amyloid beta-protein impair synaptic 
plasticity and behavior. Behav Brain Res 192(1):106-113. 
Klein WL, Krafft GA, & Finch CE (2001) Targeting small Abeta oligomers: the 
solution to an Alzheimer's disease conundrum? Trends Neurosci 24(4):219-224. 
Lesne S, et al. (2006) A specific amyloid-beta protein assembly in the brain impairs 
memory. Nature 440(7082):352-357. 
Shankar GM, et al. (2008) Amyloid-beta protein dimers isolated directly from 
Alzheimer's brains impair synaptic plasticity and memory. Nat Med 14(8):837-842. 
Oddo S, et al. (2003) Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease with plaques 
and tangles: intracellular Abeta and synaptic dysfunction. Neuron 39(3):409-421. 
Duff K & Suleman F (2004) Transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease: how 
useful have they been for therapeutic development? Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic 
3(1):47-59. 
Dodart JC, Mathis C, Bales KR, & Paul SM (2002) Does my mouse have 
Alzheimer's disease? Genes Brain Behav 1(3):142-155. 
Johnstone EM, Chaney MO, Norris FH, Pascual R, & Little SP (1991) Conservation 
of the sequence of the Alzheimer's disease amyloid peptide in dog, polar bear and 
five other mammals by cross-species polymerase chain reaction analysis. Brain Res 
Mol Brain Res 10(4):299-305. 
Sarasa M & Pesini P (2009) Natural non-trasgenic animal models for research in 
Alzheimer's disease. Curr Alzheimer Res 6(2):171-178. 
Braidy N, et al. (2011) Recent rodent models for Alzheimer's disease: clinical 
implications and basic research. J Neural Transm. 
Beck M, Bigl V, & Rossner S (2003) Guinea pigs as a nontransgenic model for APP 
processing in vitro and in vivo. Neurochem Res 28(3-4):637-644. 
Bons N, Rieger F, Prudhomme D, Fisher A, & Krause KH (2006) Microcebus 
murinus: a useful primate model for human cerebral aging and Alzheimer's disease? 
Genes Brain Behav 5(2):120-130. 
Inestrosa NC, et al. (2005) Human-like rodent amyloid-beta-peptide determines 
Alzheimer pathology in aged wild-type Octodon degu. Neurobiol Aging 
26(7):1023-1028. 
van Groen T, et al. (2011) Age-related brain pathology in Octodon degu: blood 
vessel, white matter and Alzheimer-like pathology. Neurobiol Aging 32(9):1651-
1661. 

16

 
 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

19. 

20. 

Fitzjohn SM, et al. (2001) Age-related impairment of synaptic transmission but 
normal long-term potentiation in transgenic mice that overexpress the human 
APP695SWE mutant form of amyloid precursor protein. J Neurosci 21(13):4691-
4698. 
Hsia AY, et al. (1999) Plaque-independent disruption of neural circuits in 
Alzheimer's disease mouse models. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96(6):3228-3233. 

22. 

21. Wang H, Megill A, He K, Kirkwood A, & Lee H-K (2012) Consequences of 
inhibiting amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing enzymes on synaptic 
function and plasticity. Neural Plasticity (In press). 
Chang EH, et al. (2006) AMPA receptor downscaling at the onset of Alzheimer's 
disease pathology in double knockin mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(9):3410-
3415. 
Ting JT, Kelley BG, Lambert TJ, Cook DG, & Sullivan JM (2007) Amyloid 
precursor protein overexpression depresses excitatory transmission through both 
presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104(1):353-
358. 

23. 

26. 

25. 

27. 

29. 

28. 

24. Middei S, et al. (2010) Learning discloses abnormal structural and functional 
plasticity at hippocampal synapses in the APP23 mouse model of Alzheimer's 
disease. Learn Mem 17(5):236-240. 
Kayed R, et al. (2003) Common structure of soluble amyloid oligomers implies 
common mechanism of pathogenesis. Science 300(5618):486-489. 
Arriagada PV, Growdon JH, Hedley-Whyte ET, & Hyman BT (1992) 
Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of 
Alzheimer's disease. Neurology 42(3 Pt 1):631-639. 
Otvos L, Jr., et al. (1994) Monoclonal antibody PHF-1 recognizes tau protein 
phosphorylated at serine residues 396 and 404. J Neurosci Res 39(6):669-673. 
Goedert M, Jakes R, & Vanmechelen E (1995) Monoclonal antibody AT8 
recognises tau protein phosphorylated at both serine 202 and threonine 205. 
Neurosci Lett 189(3):167-169. 
Palop JJ & Mucke L (2010) Amyloid-beta-induced neuronal dysfunction in 
Alzheimer's disease: from synapses toward neural networks. Nat Neurosci 
13(7):812-818. 
Larson ME & Lesne SE (2012) Soluble Abeta oligomer production and toxicity. J 
Neurochem 120 Suppl 1:125-139. 
Cleary JP, et al. (2005) Natural oligomers of the amyloid-beta protein specifically 
disrupt cognitive function. Nat Neurosci 8(1):79-84. 
De Felice FG, et al. (2007) Abeta oligomers induce neuronal oxidative stress 
through an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-dependent mechanism that is blocked by 
the Alzheimer drug memantine. J Biol Chem 282(15):11590-11601. 
Cenini G, et al. (2010) Generation of reactive oxygen species by beta amyloid 
fibrils and oligomers involves different intra/extracellular pathways. Amino Acids 
38(4):1101-1106. 
Lacor PN, et al. (2007) Abeta oligomer-induced aberrations in synapse 
composition, shape, and density provide a molecular basis for loss of connectivity 
in Alzheimer's disease. J Neurosci 27(4):796-807. 
Lacor PN, et al. (2004) Synaptic targeting by Alzheimer's-related amyloid beta 
oligomers. J Neurosci 24(45):10191-10200. 

32. 

31. 

33. 

35. 

34. 

30. 

17

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

36. 

37. 

Lauren J, Gimbel DA, Nygaard HB, Gilbert JW, & Strittmatter SM (2009) Cellular 
prion protein mediates impairment of synaptic plasticity by amyloid-beta oligomers. 
Nature 457(7233):1128-1132. 
Renner M, et al. (2010) Deleterious effects of amyloid beta oligomers acting as an 
extracellular scaffold for mGluR5. Neuron 66(5):739-754. 

38. Walsh DM, et al. (2002) Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid beta protein 

potently inhibit hippocampal long-term potentiation in vivo. Nature 416(6880):535-
539. 
Townsend M, Shankar GM, Mehta T, Walsh DM, & Selkoe DJ (2006) Effects of 
secreted oligomers of amyloid beta-protein on hippocampal synaptic plasticity: a 
potent role for trimers. J Physiol 572(Pt 2):477-492. 
Cheng IH, et al. (2007) Accelerating amyloid-beta fibrillization reduces oligomer 
levels and functional deficits in Alzheimer disease mouse models. J Biol Chem 
282(33):23818-23828. 
Reed MN, et al. (2009) Cognitive effects of cell-derived and synthetically derived 
Abeta oligomers. Neurobiol Aging. 
Bernstein SL, et al. (2009) Amyloid-beta protein oligomerization and the 
importance of tetramers and dodecamers in the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease. 
Nat Chem 1(4):326-331. 
Pavia J, de Ceballos ML, & Sanchez de la Cuesta F (1998) Alzheimer's disease: 
relationship between muscarinic cholinergic receptors, beta-amyloid and tau 
proteins. Fundam Clin Pharmacol 12(5):473-481. 
Oddo S, et al. (2006) Reduction of soluble Abeta and tau, but not soluble Abeta 
alone, ameliorates cognitive decline in transgenic mice with plaques and tangles. J 
Biol Chem 281(51):39413-39423. 
Rank KB, et al. (2002) Direct interaction of soluble human recombinant tau protein 
with Abeta 1-42 results in tau aggregation and hyperphosphorylation by tau protein 
kinase II. FEBS Lett 514(2-3):263-268. 
Zempel H, Thies E, Mandelkow E, & Mandelkow EM (2010) Abeta oligomers 
cause localized Ca(2+) elevation, missorting of endogenous Tau into dendrites, Tau 
phosphorylation, and destruction of microtubules and spines. J Neurosci 
30(36):11938-11950. 
Decker H, Lo KY, Unger SM, Ferreira ST, & Silverman MA (2010) Amyloid-beta 
peptide oligomers disrupt axonal transport through an NMDA receptor-dependent 
mechanism that is mediated by glycogen synthase kinase 3beta in primary cultured 
hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci 30(27):9166-9171. 
Shipton OA, et al. (2011) Tau protein is required for amyloid beta-induced 
impairment of hippocampal long-term potentiation. J Neurosci 31(5):1688-1692. 
Gu Z, Liu W, & Yan Z (2009) {beta}-Amyloid impairs AMPA receptor trafficking 
and function by reducing Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II synaptic 
distribution. J Biol Chem 284(16):10639-10649. 
Almeida CG, et al. (2005) Beta-amyloid accumulation in APP mutant neurons 
reduces PSD-95 and GluR1 in synapses. Neurobiol Dis 20(2):187-198. 
Kamenetz F, et al. (2003) APP processing and synaptic function. Neuron 37(6):925-
937. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

18

 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

Lazarov O, Lee M, Peterson DA, & Sisodia SS (2002) Evidence that synaptically 
released beta-amyloid accumulates as extracellular deposits in the hippocampus of 
transgenic mice. J Neurosci 22(22):9785-9793. 
Zhang C, et al. (2009) Presenilins are essential for regulating neurotransmitter 
release. Nature 460(7255):632-636. 
Boric K, Munoz P, Gallagher M, & Kirkwood A (2008) Potential adaptive function 
for altered long-term potentiation mechanisms in aging hippocampus. J Neurosci 
28(32):8034-8039. 
Lee HK, Min SS, Gallagher M, & Kirkwood A (2005) NMDA receptor-
independent long-term depression correlates with successful aging in rats. Nat 
Neurosci 8(12):1657-1659. 
Rosenzweig ES & Barnes CA (2003) Impact of aging on hippocampal function: 
plasticity, network dynamics, and cognition. Prog Neurobiol 69(3):143-179. 

57. Willig F, et al. (1987) Short-term memory, exploration and locomotor activity in 

58. 

59. 

aged rats. Neurobiol Aging 8(5):393-402. 
Lukaszewska I & Radulska A (1994) Object recognition is not impaired in old rats. 
Acta Neurobiol Exp 54(2):143-150. 
Ponce A, Cerpa W, Inestrosa N, & Palacios AG (2006) Aging and Spatial Memory 
in the rodent Octodon degus. C139, page 39. Curico 27-29 Sept. II Annual Meeting 
of the Chilean Neuroscience Society. Chile. 

19

 
 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

Figure Legends 

Fig. 1. Age-dependent decline in cognitive performance in O. degus. A: Average 
number of correct choices per day in the T-maze test. Two-way ANOVA (F(11,33) = 34.59, \* 
p< 0.0001) followed by Bonferroni post-hoc test (p < 0.05) on the last 3 days for aged (36-
60 mo) versus young (6-12 mo). B: Average correct choices at the end of the experimental 
phase from 6 mo (white), 12 mo (gray), 36 mo (blue) and 60 mo (red) degus. One-way 
ANOVA (F(3,26) = 6.509, \*p = 0.002) followed by Tukey´s post-hoc test (p < 0.05). C: 
Preference index for object recognition. Paired two-tailed t-test (\*p < 0.01) novel versus 
familiar objects. D: Average exploration time for novel vs familiar objects. Paired two-
tailed t-test (\*p < 0.01) versus familiar objects. The values in parentheses indicate the 
number of animals. 

Fig. 2. Altered synaptic transmission and postsynaptic deficits in the Schaffer 
Collateral–CA1 pathway. Representative traces of fEPSP at different stimulus intensities 
from 6 mo (white), 12 mo (gray), 36 mo (blue) and 60 mo (red) degus. Scale bars: 1mV, 10 
ms. A1: AMPAR mediated input-output curves, from 6 mo (white), 12 mo (gray), 36 mo 
(blue) and 60 mo (red) degus. One-way ANOVA (F(3,58) = 157.3, \*p < 0.0001) followed by 
Tukey´s post-hoc test (p < 0.05). A2: Relationship between FV amplitude or A3: fEPSP 
slope and stimulus intensity from 6 mo (white), 12 mo (gray), 36 mo (blue) and 60 mo (red) 
degus. Repeated measures ANOVA (F(15,45) = 61.06, \*p < 0.0001) followed by Bonferroni 
post-hoc test (p < 0.05). B1: Normal paired-pulse facilitation between groups. B2: 
Representative traces at interstimulus intervals of 50 ms are shown. Scale bars: 1 mV, 20 
ms. C1: Amplitudes and frequencies of AMPAR mediated mEPSCs from young (white) 
and aged (red) degus. C2: Cumulative probability plots for mEPSC amplitude size. Insert, 
representative superposed events, Calibration: 5pA, 20ms C3: Representative traces of 
mEPSCs are shown. Scale bars: 20pA, 2 s Calibration: 1mV, 10ms. Unpaired two-tailed t-
test (\*p< 0.01) young versus aged. The values in parentheses indicate the number of 
hippocampal slices (left) and the number of animals (right) used. 

Fig. 3. Postsynaptic proteins affect synapse during degus aging. A: Representative blot 
of synaptic proteins from hippocampus extracts (age indicated above lanes). Arrows 
indicate respective migration positions. B: Relative levels of synaptophysin (SYP), PSD-
95, GluR2-AMPAR subunit and NR2b-NMDAR subunit in the hippocampus from 6 mo 
(white), 12 mo (gray), 36 mo (blue) and 60 mo (red) degus. Mean values of synaptic 
proteins are relative to (cid:533)-tubulin levels. One-way ANOVA (F(3,20) = 6.626, \*p = 0.0027 for 
PSD-95), (F(3,20) = 3.968, \*p = 0.0227 for GluR2) and (F(3,21) = 2.662, \*p = 0.0745 for 
NR2b) followed by Tukey´s post-hoc test (p < 0.05) for young (6-12 mo) vs aged (36-60 
mo). 

20

 
 
 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

Fig. 4. Impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity in aged Octodon degus. A: TBS-
induced LTP in Schaffer Collateral–CA1 synapse. Traces shown to the right are 
representative fEPSPs recorded 1 min before (1) and 60 min after (2) TBS. LTP protocol 
was delivered at the time indicated by the arrow. Averaged LTP magnitude during the last 
ten minutes of recording for 6 mo (white), 12 mo (gray), 36 mo (blue) and 60 mo (red) 
degus is also shown. Two-way ANOVA (F(1,19) = 1841, \*p < 0.0001) followed by 
Bonferroni post-hoc test (p < 0.05) on the last 10 min for aged versus young. B: ppLFS-
induced LTD in Schaffer Collateral–CA1 synapse. Traces shown to the right are 
representative fEPSPs recorded 1 min before (1) and 60 min after (2) ppLFS. LTD protocol 
was delivered at the time indicated by the horizontal open bar. Averaged LTD magnitude 
during the last ten minutes of recording for 6 mo (white), 12 mo (gray), 36 mo (blue) and 
60 mo (red) degus is also shown. Two-way ANOVA (F(1,19) = 435.6, \*p < 0.0001) followed 
by Bonferroni post-hoc test (p < 0.05) on the last 10 min for aged versus young. Scale bars: 
1mV, 10ms. The values in parentheses indicate the number of hippocampal slices (left) and 
the number of animals (right) used. 

Fig. 5. Accumulation of large soluble A(cid:533) oligomers and tau phosphorylation during 
aging. A1: Representative blot for amyloid oligomers using anti-A(cid:533) peptide antibody 4G8. 
Arrows indicate respective migration positions of hexamers (6-mer), nonamers (9-mer) and 
dodecamers (12-mer). Synthetic A(cid:533)42 peptide was used as size marker and positive control 
(right lane). A2: Identification and relative levels of different A(cid:533) oligomeric associations in 
hippocampal extracts from 6 mo (white), 12 mo (gray), 36 mo (blue) and 60 mo (red) 
degus. One-way ANOVA (F(3,21) = 17.21, \*p < 0.0001 for 6-mer) and (F(3,19) = 5.439, 
\*p=0.0026 for 12-mer) followed by Tukey´s post-hoc test (p < 0.05) for aged versus young. 
B: Relative levels of soluble A(cid:533) oligomers (Insert, representative slot blot from 
hippocampal extracts using anti-oligomeric antibody A11). One-way ANOVA (F(3,19) = 
5.439, p = 0.0072) followed by Tukey´s post-hoc test (p < 0.05) for aged (36-60 mo) versus 
young (6-12 mo). C: Determination of phosphorylated tau protein levels using PHF-1 and 
AT8 antibodies. (Insert, representative blot for PHF-1, AT8 and (cid:533)-actin). One-way 
ANOVA (F(3,20) = 23.21, \*p < 0.0001, for PHF-1) and (F(3,20) = 5.95, \*p = 0.0059, for AT8) 
followed by Tukey´s post-hoc test (p < 0.05) for aged versus young. The values in 
parentheses indicate the number of animals used. 

Fig. 6. Large A(cid:533) oligomers and tau phosphorylation correlate with LTP and memory 
impairments. Relationships between LTP magnitude (A), T-maze (B), ORM (C) and 
soluble dodecamer (A(cid:533)\*56) levels for young and aged degus. Relationships between LTP 
magnitude (D), T-maze (E), and ORM (F) and PHF-1epitope tau phosphorylated levels for 
young and aged degus. A high correlation was observed for LTP and ORM. The values in 
parentheses indicate the number of animals used. 

21

 
 
 
 
Ardiles et al. Memory loss in a rodent natural model of AD 

Fig. 7. Amyloid deposition and tau phosphorylation begins in the cerebral cortex of O. 
degus. A-D: Immunoreactivity for A(cid:533) peptides using the specific antibody 6E10 showed 
extracellular (black arrows) staining in the hippocampus and the cerebral cortex from 
degus. A greater number of extracellular insoluble deposits were observed in aged (72 mo, 
C, D) compared to young (12 mo, A, B) degus. E-H: Immunodetection of pathological 
phosphorylated tau using the specific antibody AT8 in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex 
from degus. A greater number of positively stained somas (black arrows) were observed in 
aged (G, H) compared to young (E, F) degus. I-J: Quantification of A(cid:533) burden (I, 
percentage of area occupied by 6E10-positive plaques) and the number of AT8-positive 
cells (J, number of neurons per area) for 6 mo (white, n=2), 12 mo (gray, n=2), 36 mo 
(blue, n=2) 60 mo (red, n=2) and 72 mo (black, n=2) revealed a significant increase after 36 
mo in cortex and after 60 mo in hippocampus. One-way ANOVA (F(4,88) = 238.8, \*p < 
0.0001 for 6E10-Hip), (F(4,88) = 646.4, \*p < 0.0001 for 6E10-Cx), (F(4,88) = 266.0, \*p < 
0.0001 for AT8-Hip), and (F(4,88) = 134.9, \*p < 0.0001 for AT8-Cx) followed by Tukey´s 
post-hoc test (p < 0.05) compared to 6 mo. 

22

 
 
 
 
 
