Decision making mechanisms in a connectionist model of
the basal ganglia
Charlotte Héricé, Radwa Khalil, Maria Moftah, Thomas Boraud, Martin

Guthrie, André Garenne

To cite this version:

Charlotte Héricé, Radwa Khalil, Maria Moftah, Thomas Boraud, Martin Guthrie, et al.. Decision
making mechanisms in a connectionist model of the basal ganglia. The Multi-disciplinary Conference
on Reinforcement Learning and Decision Making (RLDM 2015), Jun 2015, Edmonton, Canada.
.
￿hal-01206514￿

HAL Id: hal-01206514

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01206514

Submitted on 29 Sep 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Decision making mechanisms in a
connectionist model of the basal ganglia
1,2,3, Radwa KHALIL

Charotte HÉRICÉ

4,

1, Marie MOFTAH
1,3 and André GARENNE

1,2,3

Thomas BORAUD

1,2,3, Martin GUTHRIE

INTRODUCTION
Basal ganglia (BG) are known to hosts mechanisms of action selection and its adaptation to a changing
environment. Their architecture consist of several parallel functional loops connecting back to distinct
areas of cortex (motor, cognitive and limbic) and processing different modalities of decision making. The
picture of parallel loops is complicated by partial convergence and divergence connections that implies
that the various loops are interacting.

BEHAVIORAL TASK

A previous BG model (developed by M. Guthrie[1]) was built of
interacting bloc-diagram based on rate-models. It was able to
learn optimized action selection during a probabilistic reward
task. The aim of the present work is to reﬁne and extend these
results to a cell-synapse level through a bottom-up approach:
→ Highlighting of the structure-function relationship and cir-
cuitry emerging properties
→ Investigation of cell-scale mechanisms impact on the whole
model capacities (learning and decision-making)

NETWORK ARCHITECTURE

4 target shapes ⇔ 4 different reward probabilities.
At each trial[2]:
- random presentation of 2 targets, at random po-
sitions
- choice made by the model
- reward given or not according to the reward
probability (probabilistic learning task)
→ The model has to learn to choose the optimum
target on each trial.

IMPLEMENTATION

dt + Vm(t)
Leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neuron model: Cm. dVm(t)
Learning takes place when a reward is obtained. It is implemented as an increase in the synaptic weights
corresponding to the projection from the cognitive cortex to the striatum.

= I(t)

Rm

RESULTS

Naive network
Ability of spontaneous action selection (deﬁned here by a sufﬁcient
difference in the activity between two regions of the motor cortex).
→ Exploration phase ⇔ Target selection of the primate.

Trained network
Ability to preferentially select the optimum target (highest reward
probability).
→ Exploitation phase ⇔ Successful learning from the primate.

Before/after learning
Better percentage of success (chosing the optimum target,
p-value<5%) after learning than before.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Guthrie et al. Interaction between cognitive and motor
cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision making: a com-
putational study, 2013 J. NeuroPhysiology

[2] B. Pasquereau et al. Shaping of Motor Responses by Incen-
tive Values through the Basal Ganglia, 2007 J. Neuroscience

INSTITUTES
1 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, CNRS UMR 5293,
Bordeaux, France 2 Équipe Mnémosyne INRIA, Talence, France
3 Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
4 Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Alexandria Univer-
sity, Alexandria, Egypt

DISCUSSION

The neural network implementation of a BG
is developed, embedded in
stochastic model
a sensory-motor closed-loop environment and
applied to an action-selection task. Once ﬁnalized,
this neuron level description model allows for
a better understanding of the information ﬂows
dynamics in the BG and for an investigation of the
physiopathological models including synapses,
cells and neuromodulators properties.

To achieve this study, an accurate implemen-
tation of a dopamine modulated LTP mechanism
will be done to reproduce a complete learning. To
validate the model, lesional tests and changes in
the conditions of the task are planned.

CONTACT
andre.garenne@u-bordeaux.fr
charlotte.herice@u-bordeaux.fr

