A behavioral framework for information representation in the brain
Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre. A behavioral framework for information
representation in the brain. Ahmed A. Moustafa. Computational Models of
Brain and Behavior, Wiley, pp.403-412, 2017, 978-1-119-15906-3.
￿hal-01651751￿

HAL Id: hal-01651751

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01651751

Submitted on 29 Nov 2017

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

A behavioral framework for information representation in the brain

Frédéric Alexandre1,2,3

1Inria, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research Centre, France 2Labri, UMR 5800,
CNRS, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP 3IMN, UMR 5293, CNRS,
Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases

Abstract : Along evolution,

increasingly complex cognitive functions have been attributed to an
increasingly com- plex brain architecture. Nevertheless, the brain
remains anchored on an organization dedicated to survival. We believe
that keeping this principle in mind is an ex- cellent way to better
decipher cerebral mechanisms and corresponding cognitive functions.
Accordingly, we des- cribe here the main characteristics and constraints
of an intelligent agent learning to survive in an intelli- gent
environment, in terms of information ﬂows and learning principles. On
this basis, we propose a frame- work of description for the architecture
of the brain of mammals, organized around four fundamental ques- tions
to be answered. These questions deﬁne the iden- tity of the goal (what
?) and the motivation to choose it (why ?), its location (where ?) and
the way to get it (how ?). Then we explain how the main requirements of
respondent and operant conditioning can be addressed within this
architecture and how it is also compatible with the elaboration of more
complex cognitive me- chanisms. This can be seen as the validation of
this framework to explore how cognitive functions might emerge from
cerebral circuits and how they have been made more complex along
evolution. It also proposes a systemic view of the brain, useful to
develop the cogni- tive architecture of an intelligent agent exploring
auto- nomously its environment and to propose to machine learning
innovative algorithms.

Keywords : Learning, cerebral systems, cognitive

architecture

Introduction

Most models in computational neuroscience addres- sing high level
cognitive functions like decision making, perceptual identiﬁcation or
selective attention set the focus on the role of the cortex and minimize
the role

of subcortical structures (Parvizi, 2009). In addition, emotional and
motivational dimensions of these func- tions are generally
underrepresented, not to mention bodily dimensions. Yet, a variety of
sources indicate that these dimensions are linked one to another and
play an important role in high level cognitive functions.

In short, cerebral circuits responsible for emotional tagging of stimuli
associate them to a valence (depen- ding if they are appetitive or
aversive, particularly to detect and identify mates, preys and
predators) and an value (depending on their intensity), whereas motiva-
tional circuits are concerned with the evaluation of the needs or the
costs associated to a behavior (Cardinal, Parkinson, Hall, & Everitt,
2002). It has been speciﬁ- cally shown that bodily data are necessary to
estimate such information (Damasio & Carvalho, 2013), and are related to
pain, pleasure, fatigue and other visceral and muscular data (Craig,
2009).

At the origin, such pieces of information are neces- sary for survival
to organize the behavior around such important external stimuli and
internal feelings. Less primitive species have higher level goals and
have de- veloped higher level cognitive functions but we claim here that
these functions are still dependent on this ini- tial substratum and
their description is not complete if speciﬁed without any reference to
these domains. Such considerations have been partly addressed in several
modeling domains like Embodied Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Pfeifer, Bongard,
& Grand, 2007), Enactivism (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991 ; O’Regan &
Noë, 2001) and more generally Cognitive Science (Gros, 2010).

The goal of this paper is to set the basis for this kind of description
in the domain of Computational Neu- roscience. This domain is frequently
used to explore cognitive functions and it is also prone to focusing on
higher level mechanisms without any reference to the more primitive
bases. To relate both levels, we propose to draw a systemic model of the
cerebral circuitry of

1

an intelligent agent learning to exploit its environment, in order to
satisfy some internal needs. We will specify more precisely in the
forthcoming sections (i) informa- tion ﬂows and learning principles at
work in such tasks and we will propose (ii) a general framework for in-
formation representation in the brain. On this basis, we will discuss
(iii) the implications for some cognitive mechanisms. Throughout these
descriptions, it will be particularly considered that more evolved
cerebral me- chanisms can be seen as extensions of more elementary
survival mechanisms, stressing the need to include the latter ones in
the study of advanced cognitive functions. The main arguments of this
picture are inspired from data in neuroscience related to
experimentations with primates, which are the main goals of this
modeling framework but information from rodents and of course from non
mammals will be also considered.

1

Information processing by the intelligent agent

The central goal of the nervous system is to help animals maintaining
their organic structure (Laborit, 1976). This is obvious when an animal
learns to get some food or to avoid a predator. In this case, we pro-
pose to deﬁne here the kind of information ﬂows that have to be
associated and some learning principles ge- nerally observed in such
circumstances.

1.1

Information ﬂows

We deﬁne three worlds (cf. ﬁgure 1) that the brain can perceive and on
which it can act. The external en- vironment includes objects and agents
in the surroun- ding world, that can be perceived by external sensors
(eyes, ears, skin, tongue, nose), deﬁning exteroception. The external
body is carrying external sensors and can act in the external
environment, depending on its po- sition perceived by proprioception.
The internal body corresponds to the visceral, chemical and hormonal ma-
chinery of the body that can be perceived by interocep- tion.
Homeostasis but also internal and external actions can modify these
internal states.

Then brain can perceive these three worlds and build from them a
neuronal representation. This representa- tion can be seen as a fourth
world that the brain might perceive (depending on cerebral connectivity)
and on which it can act, modifying neuronal activations. Some of them
will have an impact on the other three worlds and will be considered as
actions at large, modifying

internal states, position of (parts of) the body or the surrounding
world itself.

1.2 Learning principles

All the actors of the picture evoked above are subject to the laws of
physics or to the laws of nature including intentionality. There are
consequently regularities and invariants that can be extracted, even if
the bad quality of perception and action (and possibly other reasons)
makes often the world appear as partly stochastic and unknown.
Extracting and exploiting these regularities (and adapting to
uncertainty) is the main purpose of learning.

Evolution is sometimes considered as a kind of lear- ning with a very
slow constant of time, leading to the selection of some information ﬂows
and of some causal relations between the resulting representations,
which can be called homeostasis or reﬂexes. Neverthe- less, learning is
preferentially described as the activity dependent plasticity of the
neuronal circuitry, yielding the elaboration of diﬀerent kinds of
memory, to re- present and store regularities extracted under a va-
riety of learning processes. Emotional learning is rela- ted to
respondent (or pavlovian) conditioning (Balleine & Killcross, 2006) and
is organized around the detec- tion of unconditional stimuli US, some
biologically si- gniﬁcant stimuli (like the perception of food or preda-
tors) triggering automatic and reﬂexe responses (like salivation or
freezing). The goal of pavlovian condi- tioning is to learn to associate
a US to a conditional stimulus CS that announces it. Depending on the
dis- tance (in space and time) to these stimuli, this can generate a
consummatory phase to get prepared to the US or a preparatory phase more
related to orientation, corresponding in both cases to a stereotyped
behavior. In summary, pavlovian conditioning performs mainly an
emotional tagging of the environment, in order to detect noxious or
appetitive stimuli. On this basis, some elementary automatic bodily,
hormonal or auto- nomic responses can be triggered (LeDoux, 2007) to
prepare the body to an inevitable event or, at best, to improve its
orientation. In contrast, operant (or instru- mental) conditioning is
going to consider such stimuli as potential external goals to avoid or
to reach and to confront them to internal goals corresponding to needs
(levels of thirst or hunger) and integrity of the body (risk of harm or
fatigue). Motivational learning will correspond to learn in which
context to explicitly se- lect actions (including internal actions and
decisions) to obtain such reinforcement (goals reaching or avoi- ding)
and will be described as a goal-directed behavior.

2

Figure 1 – Systemic view of the brain and its relations to the external
environment and the body, including its internal and external facet.
Perception of these worlds corresponds respectively to exteroception,
interoception and proprioception. This results in a neuronal
representation which might decide for a modiﬁcation (considered as an
action) in any of these worlds. These information ﬂows are the basis for
perceiving needs and goals and for deﬁning the most appropriate
responses for the survival of the agent.

3

After extensive learning, the context will be suﬃcient to trigger
actions with no reference to the targeted rein- forcement and will be
called habitual behavior (Gruber & McDonald, 2012).

localized ? How it can be reached ? For each of that questions, we
propose an initial level of representation, as generally described in
the sensory cortex and in an- cient extracortical structures.

In addition to these two learning paradigms, cen- tral for survival
capabilities and present in all ver- tebrates (Laberge,
Muhlenbrock-Lenter, Grunwald, & Roth, 2006), other kinds of learning
have evolved to in- crease animal skills, complexifying their semantic,
epi- sodic or working memories and accordingly the kind of information
they can manipulate, as described below.

2 A reasoned framework of in- formation representation in the brain

We have described some characteristics of an animal seen as an agent
engaged in emotional and motivatio- nal learning for a survival purpose.
We can reasonably propose that regularities extracted by these and other
kinds of learning will be extracted and represented in the brain from
information exchanged with the three worlds enumerated above and with
other brain regions. Speciﬁcally, these pieces of knowledge will be used
to act on and modify these worlds and neuronal activity in the brain.
Beyond survival, we will argue below that some of these behaviors are
also classically described as mobilizing high level cognitive functions,
depending on the mechanisms engaged.

In order to emphasize that this description of the cognitive
architecture is not a loose analogy but re- mains tightly constrained by
the cerebral circuitry, we propose here a reasoned framework of
information re- presentation in the brain (cf ﬁgure 2) and explain how
it ﬁts with known anatomical and physiological charac- teristics of the
brain and how it is particularly conve- nient to bear information ﬂows
and learning principles evoked above.

On the one hand, we describe the brain as loops between ﬁve major kinds
of neuronal structures : (i) Ancient extracortical structures for
elementary senso- rimotor associations ; (ii) The sensory cortex for the
representation of sensory information ; (iii) The hip- pocampus for the
binding of multimodal information ; (iv) The frontal cortex for action
representation ; (v) The basal ganglia for action selection. On the
other hand, we propose to organize the behavior around four fundamental
questions that the brain has to answer : What is the goal of the action
? Why is it appropriate considering the current motivation ? Where is
this goal

What - The representation of the goal : The amygdala is an ancient
cerebral structure playing a central role in pavlovian conditioning
(LeDoux, 2007). It is composed of several nuclei (Swanson & Petro- vich,
1998), including the basolateral nucleus involved in learning the CS-US
association and the central nu- cleus for the expression of emotional
responses and re- lated physiological responses, through structures like
the periaqueductal gray (PAG) and the lateral hypo- thalamus and also
through nuclei releasing neuromo- dulators (LeDoux, 2007). The
basolateral region has been extensively studied (Belova, Paton,
Morrison, & Salzman, 2007 ; Pessoa & Adolphs, 2010) and appears to
encode many characteristics related to the CS and the US. It can be
consequently described as involved in the representation of goals or
elements of goals of the behavior. This region is also in relation with
many ce- rebral structures informed by emotional learning and able to
provide amygdala with more precise and ela- borate information than
rough sensory information re- ceived by the amygdala in primitive
animals (Laberge et al., 2006). There are particularly massive relations
with the Medial Temporal Lobe, including the medial prefrontal cortex,
the hippocampus and the temporal region of the sensory cortex (cf
(Carrere & Alexandre, 2015) for details). Speciﬁcally, neurons in the
temporal cortex has been described as selectively responding to physical
characteristics (Rousselet, Thorpe, & Fabre- Thorpe, 2004), necessary to
describe and identify ob- jects that might correspond to the goal of the
behavior when associated to an attentional process.

Why - Motivation of the goal : The lateral hy- pothalamus is an ancient
sensorimotor structure rela- ted to the processing of needs, since it is
responsive to appetitive US and triggers actions related to digestive
functions (Craig, 2003). The same can be said about the PAG, rather
concerned with aversive stimuli and defensive behavior (Bandler &
Shipley, 1994). It has also been reported that more complex motivational
be- havior can be prepared in these structures in collabora- tion with
the posterior insula, a cerebral sensory region known for example to
represent levels of water depriva- tion or precise characteristics of a
pain (Craig, 2009), which are typical examples of motivations to act.

Where - Position of the goal : The superior col- liculus is a central
structure for eye movements and gaze orientation (Lee, Rohrer, & Sparks,
1988), in- cluding sensory layers representing the surrounding

4

Figure 2 – This scheme proposes to highlight some elements of
information representation, extracted from the literature describing the
brain of mammals and mostly of primates. Considering the ﬁve main
cerebral regions (the basal ganglia, the sensory and the frontal cortex,
the hippocampus and several ancient extracortical sensorimotor regions
taken as a whole), colors in the scheme indicate some important
relations between these structures forming loops, even if the text
reports also other important connections between loops. In the picture,
a simple keyword refers roughly, in the cortical regions, to the kind of
fonctions this region contributes and the text explains in some more
details that these functions address four fundamental questions (What,
Why, Where and How). In the basal ganglia, the striatum is composed of
its dorsolateral part DLS, dorsomedial part DMS and limbic part, also
called Nucleus Accumbens NAcc with a shell and a core part ; with output
structures like the internal Globus Pallidus and the substantia nigra
pars reticulata GPI-SNr and the ventral pallidum VP ; with dopaminergic
regions ventral tegmentum area VTA and substantia nigra pars compacta
SNc). Several regions of the sensory cortex (in the parietal, temporal
and insular parts) are receiving inputs from the sensory thalamus and
regions of the frontal cortex include the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
vmPFC, the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex dmPFC, the lateral prefrontal
cortex with ventral and dorsal parts vlPFC and dlPFC, the frontal eye
ﬁeld FEF and the motor and premotor regions. The hippocampus is
represented with its main internal structures dentate gyrus DG, CA3 and
CA1 and its input cortical structures. In the extracortical regions,
structures are the Amygdala, the Hypothalamus, the Superior Colliculus
(SC) and the Cerebellum.

5

environment in topographic layers (Taouali, Goﬀart, Alexandre, &
Rougier, 2015) and motor layers orien- ting the body toward stimuli
selected by competition inside these maps (Dean, Redgrave, & Westby,
1989). More complex behaviors of spatial orientation can be obtained by
collaboration with the Frontal Eye Field (FEF) regions of the frontal
cortex (Sommer & Wurtz, 2004) and the posterior dorsal cortex. The
superior part of this latter region has been described for a long time
(Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982) as addressing the Where question in the
sensory cortex by representing spatial information about the
environment.

How - Motor control of the goal : In contrast, the inferior part of the
posterior dorsal cortex has been described as answering the question How
(Milner & Goodale, 1995), particularly because it encodes cha-
racteristics useful for object manipulation. In this do- main, the
cerebellum (Manto et al., 2012) is a key cere- bral structure for
sensorimotor control and participates with the dorsal cortex to complex
voluntary movements (Middleton & Strick, 2000).

3 Extension to some cognitive

mechanisms

At this stage, each of the elementary sensorimotor associations evoked
above can yield a pertinent beha- vior and is probably suﬃcient for an
animal with li- mited perception and behavioral repertoire : in an en-
active way (O’Regan & Noë, 2001), each perception can elicit a response
adapted to identify the nature of a goal, orient toward this goal and
manipulate and consume it to satisfy a need. Nevertheless, in the real
life things are not so simple and these elementary sen- sorimotor
associations might be not complex enough, incompatible or might require
a more elaborated deci- sion process to go beyond simple survival in a
richer en- vironment including uncertainty and a variety of rules and
laws. With no claim of exhaustivity, we evoke here how other cerebral
circuits might participate to this higher level cognitive architecture.

For each of these sensorimotor associations, there is not a unique
relation between one stimulus and one action answering the corresponding
question and the association can sometimes depend on a context, wha-
tever its spatial or temporal form. This is the role of reinforcement
learning, as compared to a simple heb- bian associative rule : it can
learn the best action to trigger to optimize reinforcement, depending on
a state not only corresponding to a stimulus but to the aggre- gation of
more information and also in the past and the

future (Niv, 2009). The basal ganglia has often been described as a
structure where a certain kind of rein- forcement learning can take
place (Joel, Niv, & Ruppin, 2002), with its unique combination of
aﬀerences from cortical and extracortical structure and dopaminergic
projections often reported to carry reward prediction errors, central in
such algorithms. It is consequently no- ticeable that these circuits
have been broken down in ﬁve parallel loops (Alexander, DeLong, &
Strick, 1986), with four loops directly addressing the four questions
mentioned above (and receiving projections from the corresponding
regions) and the last one for associative integration (cf ﬁgure 2 for
more details).

More precisely, in the motor loop (how ?), the dorso- lateral striatum
integrates information from the motor cortex and proprioceptive
information from the sensory cortex. The oculomotor loop (Hikosaka,
Nakamura, & Nakahara, 2006) is related to the frontal eye ﬁeld area for
selection of gaze orientation (where ?). The anterior cingulate loop
includes the ventral striatum (mainly the core part of the nucleus
accumbens) and is reported to energize the action, depending on the
level of moti- vation and the cost of the action (Niv, 2007) (why ?).
The orbitofrontal loop includes the shell of the nucleus accumbens and
is concerned with the hedonic value of objects (Kringelbach, 2005) (what
?). For each of these loops, the role of the basal ganglia is to learn
to trigger, depending on the context, diﬀerent kinds of actions re-
presented in the related region of the frontal cortex, as it is sketched
in ﬁgure 2.

A frequent situation occuring in realistic cases is that several objects
in the environment can elicit several actions in the same or in diﬀerent
loops and that a global analysis has to be made to select the most ad-
vantageous action. The architecture of the basal gan- glia has also been
described as particularly adapted to this problem (Redgrave, Prescott, &
Gurney, 1999). In contrast to other structures like the cortex with dis-
tributed and sparse connectivity, the process of action selection in the
basal ganglia is centralized and it can address conﬂicts between
diﬀerent loops. This is due to its funneling architecture providing a
convergence of information (Parent & Hazrati, 1995) and to other
characteristics like a spiraling eﬀect providing commu- nications
between the loops (Haber, Fudge, & McFar- land, 2000).

Among the loops, those answering to the questions What and Why have a
speciﬁc role, because they ad- dress directly the problem of goal
selection from in- ternal needs and external opportunities, whereas
ques- tions how and where are more related to spatial contin- gencies
(cf ﬁgure 3 for a more behavioral interpreta-

6

tion). These limbic loops are particularly the place for articulation
between pavlovian and operant conditio- ning, giving a special role to
the shell and the core of the nucleus accumbens, the two input regions
of the basal ganglia for these loops (Mannella, Gurney, & Bal- dassarre,
2013). It is consequently important to notice that the hippocampus is
mainly associated to these two loops (Voorn, Vanderschuren, Groenewegen,
Robbins, & Pennartz, 2004) (and not the others), providing epi- sodic
memories to the process of action selection of the basal ganglia. This
has been analyzed as a key com- ponent of goal-directed behavior related
to the evoca- tion of speciﬁc cases, as compared to more habitual
behavior rather observed in the other loops (Packard & Knowlton, 2002).

The development of the prefrontal cortex has provi- ded a more complex
processing of time, with the deve- lopment of working memory processes
(O’Reilly, 2010), particularly useful in the limbic loops (what and why)
to estimate histories of past experiences and contribute to a more
accurate evaluation of uncertainty (McClure, Gilzenrat, & Cohen, 2006).
Considering more recent steps in the evolution process, the development
of the prefrontal cortex is a major event and provides cogni- tive
control to the intellectual abilities (Badre, 2008). This is another way
to associate the diﬀerent loops, by elaborating more complex rules to
trigger actions. Even if this is described in terms of planning and
reaso- ning, it remains anchored in the same scheme of loops between the
basal ganglia and the prefrontal cortex.

Discussion

In this paper, we have described brain structures and functions within a
global framework of information representation. Starting from a simple
agent learning to satisfy some needs in an unknown environment, we have
speciﬁed some constraints concerning information ﬂows and learning
principles and have associated these constraints to a general picture of
the brain describing four main loops answering four questions important
for survival. Then, we have begun to explain that some im- portant
cognitive capabilities extending beyond survi- val considerations are
tightly linked to these principles because they have been elaborated and
developed on this primitive substratum. The limited size of the paper
prevented from going in more details on these cognitive functions and
neither to extend to other functions re- lated to the language for
example but this should be done in future works. For the moment, the
main beha- vioral interpretations of the framework elaborated here

are summarized in ﬁgure 3.

Several authors have already described the brain as answering such
important questions, including (Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982) for the
what/where op- position, (Milner & Goodale, 1995) for the how and
(Verschure, Pennartz, & Pezzulo, 2014) for adding the why but these
works were less accurate concerning the reciprocal mapping of brain
structures and functions and the corresponding reﬁnement along
evolution. This idea is reminiscent of the principle of imbricated
senso- rimotor loops proposed in (Guillery, 2005), convenient both for
incremental learning and for responding at anytime.

This work can be useful in computational neuros- cience because it
proposes a global framework where to include some speciﬁc model and can
prevent from building models in isolation with no references to other
structures, functions and related information ﬂows and learning
principles. It can also be useful in machine learning because it can be
a source of inspiration for bio-inspired learning algorithms,
particularly conside- ring the problem of learning in autonomy. It can
be consequently interesting in the domain of autonomous robotics, also
because it emphasizes the important role of the body and the environment
in the development of cognitive functions in the brain.

Références

Alexander, G., DeLong, M., & Strick, P. (1986). Pa- rallel organization
of functionally segregated cir- cuits linking basal ganglia and cortex.
Ann. Rev. Neurosci., 9 , 357-381.

Badre, D. (2008). Cognitive control, hierarchy, and the rostro–caudal
organization of the frontal lobes. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12 (5),
193–200.

Balleine, B. W., & Killcross, S. (2006). Parallel incen- tive processing
: an integrated view of amygdala function. Trends Neurosci , 29 (5),
272–279. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2006.03.002

Bandler, R., & Shipley, M. T. (1994). Columnar organi- zation in the
midbrain periaqueductal gray : mo- dules for emotional expression ?
Trends in Neu- rosciences, 17 (9), 379–389.

Belova, M. A., Paton, J. J., Morrison, S. E., & Salz- man, C. D. (2007).
Expectation modulates neu- ral responses to pleasant and aversive
stimuli in primate amygdala. Neuron, 55 (6), 970–984. Cardinal, R. N.,
Parkinson, J. A., Hall, J., & Eve- (2002). Emotion and motivation :
ritt, B. J. the role of the amygdala, ventral striatum, and

7

Figure 3 – This ﬁgure intends to integrate several lines of discussion
in this paper, including the brain-body- environment system and the
framework of brain organization related to the four fundamental
questions. We show in this ﬁgure that sensory interoceptive and
exteroceptive poles interact with the limbic and motor poles to decide
for the main characteristics of the behavior. Answers to the fundamental
questions specify sensory constraints in the motor pole related to the
position in space and to the body, and in the interoceptive pole related
to pain and pleasure and to fundamental needs. Preferences and
motivations in the limbic pole generate a consummatory behavior or
organize a preparatory behavior with the motor pole that can trigger
movements and evoke selective attention to obtain desired changes in the
internal and external world and, accordingly, in the sensory
perceptions.

8

prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience & Biobehavio- ral Reviews, 26 (3),
321–352. doi: 10.1016/s0149 -7634(02)00007-6 Carrere, M., & Alexandre,
F.

(2015). A pavlovian model of the amygdala and its inﬂuence within the
medial temporal lobe. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 9 (41).

Craig, A. (2003). Interoception : the sense of the phy- siological
condition of the body. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 13 (4), 500–505.

Craig, A.

(2009). How do you feel – now ? the an- terior insula and human
awareness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 10 , 59–70.

Damasio, A. R., & Carvalho, G. B. (2013). The na- ture of feelings :
Evolutionary and neurobiologi- cal origins. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
14 (2), 143–152.

Dean, P., Redgrave, P., & Westby, G. W.

(1989). Event or emergency ? Two response systems in the mammalian
superior colliculus. Trends in neurosciences, 12 (4), 137–147.

Gros, C. (2010). Cognition and Emotion : Perspectives of a Closing Gap.
Cognitive Computation, 2 (2), 78–85.

Gruber, A. J., & McDonald, R. J. (2012). Context, emotion, and the
strategic pursuit of goals : In- teractions among multiple brain systems
control- ling motivated behaviour. Frontiers in Behavio- ral
Neuroscience, 6 (50).

Guillery, R. W.

(2005). Anatomical pathways that link perception and action. In Progress
in brain research (Vol. 149, pp. 235–256). Elsevier. Haber, S., Fudge,
J., & McFarland, N. (2000). Stria- tonigrostriatal pathways in primates
form an as- cending spiral from the shell to the dorsolateral striatum.
The Journal of Neuroscience, 20 (6), 2369-2382.

Hikosaka, O., Nakamura, K., & Nakahara, H. (2006). Basal Ganglia orient
eyes to reward. J. Neuro- physiol , 95 (2), 567–584.

Joel, D., Niv, Y., & Ruppin, E. (2002). Actor–critic models of the basal
ganglia : new anatomical and computational perspectives. Neural
Networks, 15 (4-6), 535–547.

Laborit, H. (1976). Eloge de la fuite. Folio Essais. LeDoux, J. (2007).
The amygdala. Current Biology,

17 (20), R868–R874.

Lee, C., Rohrer, W. H., & Sparks, D. L. (1988). Popula- tion coding of
saccadic eye movements by neurons in the superior colliculus. Nature,
332 (6162), 357–360. doi: 10.1038/332357a0

Mannella, F., Gurney, K., & Baldassarre, G. (2013). The nucleus
accumbens as a nexus between va- lues and goals in goal-directed
behavior : a review and a new hypothesis. Frontiers in behavioral
neuroscience, 7 .

Manto, M., Bower, J. M., Conforto, A. B. B., Delgado- García, J. M., da
Guarda, S. N. F. N., Gerwig, M., . . . Timmann, D. (2012). Consensus
paper : roles of the cerebellum in motor control–the di- versity of
ideas on cerebellar involvement in mo- vement. Cerebellum (London,
England), 11 (2), 457–487.

McClure, S., Gilzenrat, M., & Cohen, J.

(2006). An exploration-exploitation model based on In norepinepherine
and dopamine activity. Y. Weiss, B. Schölkopf, & J. Platt (Eds.), Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems 18 (pp. 867–874). MIT
Press. Consulté sur http://www.csbmb.princeton.edu/
~{}smcclure/pdf/MGC_NIPS.pdf

Middleton, F. A., & Strick, P. L. (2000). Basal ganglia and cerebellar
loops : motor and cognitive cir- cuits. Brain Research Reviews, 31 (2),
236–250. Milner, A., & Goodale, M. (1995). The visual brain in

action. Oxford University Press, USA.

Niv, Y. (2007). Cost, Beneﬁt, Tonic, Phasic : What Do Response Rates
Tell Us about Dopamine and Motivation. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1104 (1), 357–376.

Niv, Y.

juin).

(2009,

Reinforcement

learning Journal of Mathematical in the brain. Consulté sur Psychology,
53 (3), 139–154. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0022249608001181

O’Regan, J. K., & Noë, A.

(2001). A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness. The
Behavioral and brain sciences, 24 (5).

Kringelbach, M. L. (2005). The human orbitofrontal cortex : linking
reward to hedonic experience. Nat Rev Neurosci , 6 (9), 691–702.

O’Reilly, R. C. (2010). The What and How of pre- frontal cortical
organization. Trends in Neuros- ciences, 33 (8), 355–361.

Laberge, F., Muhlenbrock-Lenter, S., Grunwald, W., & Roth, G. (2006).
Evolution of the Amyg- dala : New Insights from Studies in Amphibians.
Brain Behav Evol , 67 (4), 177–187. Consulté sur
http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000091119

Packard, M. G., & Knowlton, B. J. (2002). Learning and memory functions
of the basal ganglia. An- nual review of neuroscience, 25 (1), 563–593.
Parent, A., & Hazrati, L. N. (1995). Functional ana- tomy of the basal
ganglia. I. The cortico-basal

9

ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop. Brain Res Brain Res Rev , 20 (1),
91–127.

Parvizi, J.

(2009). Corticocentric myopia : old bias in new cognitive sciences.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13 (8), 354–359.

Pessoa, L., & Adolphs, R. (2010). Emotion processing and the amygdala :
from a ’low road’ to ’many roads’ of evaluating biological signiﬁcance.
Na- ture reviews. Neuroscience, 11 (11), 773–783. doi: 10.1038/nrn2920

Pfeifer, R., Bongard, J., & Grand, S.

(2007). How the body shapes the way we think : a new view of
intelligence. MIT Press.

Redgrave, P., Prescott, T. J., & Gurney, K. (1999). The basal ganglia :
A vertebrate solution to the selection problem ? Neuroscience, 89 (4),
1009– 1023.

Rousselet, G., Thorpe, S., & Fabre-Thorpe, M. (2004). How parallel is
visual processing in the ventral path ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8
(8), 363– 370.

Sommer, M., & Wurtz, R.

(2004). What the brain stem tells the frontal cortex. I. Oculomotor si-
gnals sent from superior colliculus to frontal eye ﬁeld via mediodorsal
thalamus. Journal of neu- rophysiology, 91 (3), 1381–1402.

Swanson, L. W., & Petrovich, G. D. (1998). What is the amygdala ? Trends
in Neurosciences, 21 (8), 323–331.

Taouali, W., Goﬀart, L., Alexandre, F., & Rougier, (2015). A
parsimonious computatio- N. P. nal model of visual target position
encoding in the superior colliculus. Biological Cybernetics, 109(4)(8),
549–559. Ungerleider, L., & Mishkin, M.

(1982). Two corti- cal visual systems. In D. Ingle, M. Goodale, & R.
Mansﬁeld (Eds.), Analysis of visual behavior (pp. 549–586). MIT Press.

Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind :
Cognitive science and human ex- perience. Cambridge, MA : MIT Press.

Verschure, P. F. M. J., Pennartz, C. M., & Pezzulo, G. (2014). The why,
what, where, when and how of goal-directed choice : neuronal and
computatio- nal principles. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B : Biological Sciences, 369 (1655), 20130483+.

Voorn, P., Vanderschuren, L. J., Groenewegen, H. J., Robbins, T. W., &
Pennartz, C. M. (2004). Put- ting a spin on the dorsal-ventral divide of
the striatum. Trends Neurosci , 27 (8), 468–474.

10


