A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytics
during computational thinking using unplugged or
tangible activities
Sabrina Barnabé, Lola Denet, Mathieu Manrique, Divya Menon, Éric Pascual,

Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Sabrina Barnabé, Lola Denet, Mathieu Manrique, Divya Menon, Éric Pascual, et al.. A low-cost
tabletop game to collect learning analytics during computational thinking using unplugged or tangible
activities. [Research Report] RR-9379, Inria. 2020. ￿hal-03040909￿

HAL Id: hal-03040909

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03040909

Submitted on 7 Dec 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

A low-cost tabletop game
to collect learning
analytics during
computational thinking
using unplugged or
tangible activities

Sabrina Barnabé , Lola Denet , Mathieu Manrique , Divya Menon ,
Éric Pascual , Margarida Romero , Thierry Viéville

G
N
E
+
R
F
-
-
9
7
3
9
-
-

/

R
R
A
R
N

I

RESEARCH
REPORT
N° 9379
December 2020

Project-Teams Mnemosyne and
LINE laboratory

I

N
R
S

I

9
9
3
6
-
9
4
2
0
N
S
S

I

A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning
analytics during computational thinking using
unplugged or tangible activities

Sabrina Barnabé ∗, Lola Denet †, Mathieu Manrique ‡, Divya
Menon §, Éric Pascual ¶, Margarida Romero ‖, Thierry Viéville

∗∗

Project-Teams Mnemosyne and LINE laboratory

Research Report n° 9379 — December 2020 — 39 pages

∗ SNJazur - Sabrina Barnabé 
† Mnemosyne Inria Research Team - Lola Denet < denet.lola@gmail.com>
‡ Laboratoire LINE, INSPÉ de Nice - Mathieu Manrique 
§ Laboratoire LINE, INSPÉ de Nice - Divya Menon 
¶ PoBot maker space – Éric Pascual 
‖ Laboratoire LINE, INSPÉ de Nice - Margarida Romero 
∗∗ Mnemosyne Inria Research Team et Laboratoire LINE - Thierry Viéville 

RESEARCH CENTRE
BORDEAUX – SUD-OUEST

200 avenue de la Vieille Tour
33405 Talence Cedex

Abstract:
We report on a new setup allowing us to collect learning analytics (LA) during computational
thinking unplugged or tangible playful activities. We target the development of computational
thinking (CT) competency, including the initiation to informatics (i.e., computer science and tech-
nology), with the goal to evaluate and analyze the development of CT. Collecting LA is mandatory
in this case and if adaptive learning is targeted. While collecting LA during online interactions
is rather straightforward, automatically collecting LA when manipulating tangible objects is more
challenging, especially in a context where low-cost greenIT material is required.
The key idea here, contrary to usual “black-box” systems working (more or less) automatically, is
to change the learning paradigm and involve the learner in the data collection, making the process
transparent and allowing her or him to also learn how to learn. This is particularly pertinent here
initiate to Informatics and CT. This means that we
since we use Informatics tools in order to . . .
have to redesign the activity scenario including its didactic and revisit the underneath pedagogy,
which turns to be an interesting and innovative challenge.

Key-words:
educational science.

computational thinking, learning analytics, unplugged activities, computational

Un montage de jeu de table à faible coût pour collecter des
traces d’apprentissage pendant l’apprentissage de la pensée
informatique avec des activités débranchées ou tangibles

Résumé :

Nous décrivons ici un montage original nous permettant de collecter des traces d’apprentissage
(learning analytics (LA)) lors d’activités débranchées ou tangibles d’initiation ludique à la pensée
informatique (computational thinking (CT)). Nous ciblons le développement de compétences en
CT, y compris l’initiation à l’informatique (c’est-à-dire l’informatique en tant que science et
technologie), dans le but d’évaluer et d’analyser le développement de la CT. La collecte de LA
est indispensable pour évaluer cet apprentissage, avec comme champ applicatif l’apprentissage
adaptatif. Bien que la collecte de LA lors d’interactions en ligne soit plutôt simple, la collecte
automatique de LA lors de la manipulation d’objets tangibles est plus diﬃcile, en particulier
dans un contexte où du matériel à faible coût et tenant compte de contraintes écologiques est
requis.

L’idée clé ici, contrairement aux systèmes habituels de «boîte noire» fonctionnant (plus ou
moins) automatiquement, est de changer le paradigme d’apprentissage et d’impliquer l’apprenant
dans la collecte de données, rendant le processus transparent et lui permettant également d’apprendre
comment apprendre. Ceci est particulièrement pertinent ici puisque nous utilisons des outils in-
formatiques pour . . . nous initier à l’informatique et à la CT. Cela signiﬁe que nous devons
repenser le scénario de l’activité, y compris sa didactique, et revisiter la pédagogie sous-jacente,
qui s’avère être un déﬁ intéressant et innovant.

Mots-clés :
science de l’éducation computationnelle.

pensée computationnelle, analyse de l’apprentissage, activités non connectées,

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 6

This contribution is produced within
the Inria AEx AIDE exploratory action
 CreaMaker
and the ANR 

 project.

Introduction

Learning computational thinking first notions by playing

General learning objectives
Scenario description
Evaluation methodology
Activity 1: Programming is that easy.
Activity 2: When cooking meets computing.
Activity 3: playing with pixels to twig coding.
Activity 4: the crea’cube problem-solving test.

Designing a modular automatically monitored tabletop

Position of the problem
Open-hardware production
Open-software production

Conclusion

References

Contributions and acknowledgements

7

9
9
10
12
13
17
21
25

28
28
28
31

33

33
35

Inria

 
 
A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 7

Introduction

Learning Computational

 Thinking as the foundation of digital

 education.

Understanding how we learn is a key issue for improving education worldwide. This is especially
true for transversal competencies sometimes referred as “21st-century skills” because some are
rather new, such (i) computational thinking (Wing 2011). See also8 (Lodi 2020) for a recent review.
Transversal competencies related to (ii) cooperation are challenged when performed in ubiquitous
and often asynchronous modalities with digital tools. Other transversal competencies such as (iii)
creativity, (iv) problem-solving and (v) critical thinking are especially important in the present period
for the development of citizens’ transformative agency (Romero 2017). These five competencies are
linked and must be considered in interdependence. For instance, computational thinking is
involves creativity in practice (e.g., creative
intrinsically related to problem-solving and 
programming). Computational thinking requires techno-creative activities to be developed and
must integrate critical thinking development,especially when acculturating citizens of all ages to
Artificial Intelligence.

As discussed in Romero and Duflot (2018), the development of computational thinking as the
foundation of digital education seems to be effective considering unplugged activities (i.e., without a
computer) for several well-understood within the cognitive embodiment studies and despite the
experimental studies are not easy to establish (Romero et al. 2018). Nevertheless, a growing corpus
of research is available regarding this topic (Menon, Romero, and Viéville 2019a) and more recently
(Huang and Looi 2020). 

The how and what

challenges

to evaluate 

learning activities

The barrier is the fact that it is not easy how to measure learning analytics during an activity with
tangible connected or unplugged objects: The mainstream approach is to record a video and
manually analyzed its contents, which is a huge work since observations have to be made on
hundreds of sessions to obtain relevant results, as realized in Romero, David and Lille (2018). In
such a context, machine learning assistive tools are only usable if there is enough data within a
corpus of quality data. In addition, the analytical activity developed by a human may be subject to
interpretation and the use of personal video data leads to heavy (but fully legitimate) ethics
committee procedure due to the recording of personal data9. For limiting the ethical risks of
personal identification of kids in the video recordings, the CreaCube protocol (Romero, Heiser and
Viéville, in press) has limited the data collection to the hands of the learner, which is also collected
through the tabletop dispositive within the fourth learning activity.

Beyond the measure challenge, is the question of what is to be measured. As studied in, e.g.,
(Romero, Lepage, and Lille 2017), it appears that the main challenge is to properly specify the task
and the observables to be taken into account. This is indissociable of modeling the learner engaged

8The frenchy word “Informatics” instead of “computing” or “programming” is often used, because
the required competencies extend beyond algorithmic and imperative programmation, but include
information coding and data representation (from image coding to knowledge formalization),
understanding of digital systems (e.g., machine architecture, networks, Internet) and related
applications (e.g., the Web) all this being essential for technological hardware and software to make
sense.
9Ideally, using automatic tools allows us to address this ethical issue, since the video stream is no
more viewed by a human.

RR N° 9379

 
 
S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 8

in the task, and our proposal, beyond the scope of this report, is to consider machine learning
models, used in what is called numerical artificial intelligence, and ontology-based formalization,
used in what is called symbolic artificial intelligence (e.g., for the semantic Web), to properly
formalize, in the precise context of the task, her or his objective, knowledge tokens and behavioral
rules, as explained in this position paper (Romero et al. 2020).
The key point, here, is that we not only want to propose some learning activity but also to evaluate
it, to better understand how a given learner learns. Evaluating the process with the practical
application of proposing adaptive and personalized learning "Parcours". Through this has been
extensively developed for online activities (see, e.g., Banihashem et al. 2018) for a recent review and
(Clement et al. 2015) for a well-studied successful example, in link with the formalization of curiosity
and intrinsic motivation (Gottlieb et al. 2013), for real-life activities only a few studies have already
addressed this issue as reviewed in (Menon, Romero and Viéville 2019a).

Considering not so common learning paradigms to take up the challenge.

Considering the need to evaluate the computational thinking process of the learner through a
permanent monitoring has some profound consequences at the methodological level, as those
raised by the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL) community (van Leeuwen,
Rummel, and van Gog 2019; Reimann 2009). Indeed, the learner is informed of the process, for
obvious deontological reasons. This means that the relation to the activity is biased, and this could
be a caveat or this could be of great advantages. More than informed about the fact the learning
activity is monitored, the learner can be involved in this monitored learning, in the following sense.
He or she plays with the machine. Not against the machine, but in cooperation with it: Helping the
machine to monitor the activity, while the monitoring helps her or his to make explicit what to
improve to succeed. This is a concrete way of learning to learn. The machine wins if it has properly
monitored the activity and the learner wins if the activity succeeds. This kind of engagement of the
learner seems, up to our best knowledge, never done before, and we are going to discuss how to
implement this paradigm in such a performative learning session. It is however in link with the fact
it is better to make explicit the learning objectives of a playful activity to engage the learner (see
Menon and Romero, 2019) for a discussion).

At a more concrete level, proposing monitored unplugged activities (e.g., play with a pedagogical
robot or even kitchenware) requires a non-trivial setup. Indeed such devices exist, but there are two
key issues: Hardware and software, on one hand, and on the other hand human-power. Considering
connected objects able to automatically report their position and configuration requires an
investment beyond what is reasonable in a learning context (typically such system cost, with the
functionalities proposed here, are at the order of magnitude of 20 to 50K€ plus an engineer full-time
position) and one concrete objective is to break this barrier and allow a teacher to build their
system, as soon as a maker-space (in the wide sense of a tinkering space) is available and can offer
to the learner the appropriate affordances for his learning processes, in this case, the computational
thinking process.

Bounding the research objectives of the present study.

For our research objectives to be reachable we have accepted the following restrictions. In the
present configuration, the player is alone with the machine/artefact (tabletop configuration), but it is
clear that learner-teacher interactions and inter-learners interactions are also crucial issues.
Hopefully, lonely learning is also an important issue, as addressed here. 

In the present configuration, only a short time (about one hour) learning period is considered, which
again is restrictive, while of great interest on its own. A step further, learners' prerequisites, context
and environment are not explicitly taken into account, activities being designed for “everyone”. This
is yet another simplification, but as detailed in the sequel, we are only considering large audience
introductive learning for which such simplification seems acceptable as verified in the literature
Inria

A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 9

(Menon et al. 2019 ; Romero, Noirpoudre, and Viéville 2018).

Here we will neither consider facial expression recognition automatic recognition (see, e.g., (Nezami
et al. 2019) for a recent contribution regarding student engagement with n good recent review of
the literature), nor wearable sensor to monitor human activity (as reviewed in, e.g., (Mukhopadhyay
2015), including emotion-related processes using heart rate variability measurements or other
biophysical measurements (see Prokofieva et al. 2019 for an example with application to education)
for two reasons. On one hand, such issues are already addressed elsewhere while the challenges
raised here are not. On the other hand, with such “easy” playful activity the young student
engagement and stress seems to be a secondary issue as observed for instance, in Cassone et al.
(2019), while this would not be the case if considering older students.

What is the paper about?

Given this general positioning, the paper is organized as follows. We first present in the following
section the four chosen activities explaining the learning objectives, the activity to realize, and how
the learner receives feedback in the function of the results to progress to the solution. The
observables are made explicit, and the way the learner is engaged in learning analytics also. In the
subsequent part, we describe the setup, focusing on the technological choices to produce low-cost
hardware (we will explain why it is important), and robust software, both also being easily
manageable, including rebuilding other activities, and will show that building such activity is by itself
a very interesting activity regarding informatics. We then will report preliminary experiments with
the proposed setup. We finally will explain the next steps of this long-term project.

Learning computational thinking first notions by playing

General learning objectives

The finality is to help discover and get initiated in computational thinking (CT), about problem-
solving, creativity and critical thinking. We not only want to support but also to assess such learning.
We primarily target kids from 7 to 10. Despite this primary target, the activity can engage other
participants of laterages due to the transversal competences which are mobilized . We target
beginners in CT, that simply know how to use a tap screen (e.g., a tablet) and know some tabletop
games, to not to be disconcerted by the setup.

The didactic objective is to not only develop computational thinking competence in terms of
algorithmic thinking (i.e., a sequence of instructions, conditional instructions, variable assignment
and loops) but also understand some basis of information coding and data representation related to
the analysis of the problem situation and the way to model a solution to devise a solution through
formal systems (code) or physical systems (e.g. sensors, actuators, etc).

The pedagogical objective is to get convinced that “Yes, I can” understand such notions, easily
affordable nowadays thanks to a real popularization10 of learning methods and contents, that it can
be playful to learn such things, beyond false ideas, and that it also helps understanding digital tools
and technologies.
The fact this game helps both learning computational thinking and raise the interest of learning

10Let us very briefly quote at this stage https://scratch.mit.edu for creative computing, https://csunplugged.org
for unplugged activities, and https://www.thymio.org for educational robotics, while elements are widely
developed along the present text.

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 10

computational thinking is briefly made explicit before the game starts.

More precisely the activities have been developed within the #5c21 framework, as sketched out in
Fig. 1 and considering the usual informatics initiation curriculum such as the British K–12 Computer
Science Framework11 (Curzon et al. 2014), as detailed in the sequel.

Fig.1 Six components of the CT competency within the #5c21 framework and related to the Collaborative
Problem-Solving (CPS) of the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2015 (Romero, Lepage,
and Lille 2017).

It is also a great opportunity to share some “scientific culture” which is understood at two levels:

 - On one hand, build on the how-to (savoir-faire) skills acquisition to share some knowledge beans
(savoir), more precisely use the mental construction elaborated during the how-to phase to build on
and fix knowledge beans (here both in computer science and mathematics), as detailed in each
activity description. In other words, we not only “play the game”, but get an overview of the
underlying notions. For instance, this allows the player to gain a concrete illustrative example of an
abstract notion, or to experiment with some mathematical concepts with concrete (often
surprisingly simple) object manipulation. At the pedagogical level, it is the fundamental way to
introduce the notion of “computational thinking”, making explicit abstract and general notions
implicitly summoned and used during the playful phase. This will be stated for each activity.

- On the other hand, also considering a multi-disciplinary point of view, and varying the activity at
the pedagogical level, it is time to discover some characters, pioneers of computer science,
answering the double question: Who and How -- who found or invented what we discover and use
nowadays? And how (in the historical meaning, i.e., in which context and circumstances, for which
finality or goal, and with which means and tools (both material and intellectual) ? Even professional

11Please refer to https://k12cs.org as a reference and https://tinyurl.com/y5fgadvm for a detailed description.
Inria

A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 11

scientists often lack such scientific culture. Here we chose to invite men and women, from across
the globe, and several historical epochs, showing that computer science is the emanation of
centuries of multi-civilisations productions by the two half of humanity 12. Knowing such “history” is
always a good way to help personify and embody abstract notions in human history, to make it his
or her history.

Scenario description

The activity is realized via a tabletop escape game, which method has been extensively studied in a
previous work of the present authors (Menon, Romero, and Viéville 2019b), including game
mechanics supporting a learning and playful experience in educational escape games 13 (Menon and
Romero 2019). A player is invited to play a tabletop escape game with a progression of four
activities, starting with a presentation and followed by an after-the-game period. Each activity
corresponds to an activity room in a box with objects in a drawer that have to be put in a correct
configuration on the activity room 2D plane within the box, as shown in Fig. 2. Activities include
unplugged activities, tangible connected objects (cards, Cubelets14) and a mobile robot (Ozobot15).

The player plays alone with the tabletop, in interaction with the screen and the different objects. 

The player always wins the game, depending on her/his performances he/she wins it without or with
several clues. In particular, contrary to usual escape games, there is no time pressure, the game
duration is “about” an hour, some actionable steps can be skipped depending on the previous
result.

The activity is along a storyline scenario16 based on computer science history. In a nutshell: « I am
Ozon the tiny robot girl and you know what? The fascinating grown-ups who created Informatics
and I have been captured by evil monsters. They refuse to let you learn the story of this science and
master all of these things, to reduce you to a digital slave. But I will share with you some secrets
about Informatics and this will allow you to help us to escape from this “computational thinking”
castle ». Ozon is going to escape from a labyrinth in the castle garden, realize a magic recipe, send a
secret encoded message and build a fantastic vehicle to escape with her new friends (i.e., scientists
who have created Informatics). The realization is visible in Fig.2 and each activity has its small

12We indeed faced the problem that science history is -by the facts- biased in terms of gender balance and
civilization balance, especially in computer science; we thus chose to be illustrative, but neither exhaustive nor
representative.
13As developed in (Menon, Romero, and Viéville 2019b) and (Menon and Romero 2019), in escape
games, after identifying a problem the learners need to organize and model the problem using the digital or
tangible tools provided to them (identifying the problem, organizing and modeling the problem). They need to
strategize the series of steps they should take to complete a task (sequencing). Players need to delegate tasks
among themselves to identify the actions that can be done simultaneously (parallelism). The actions taken by
them in the previous levels may affect the outcomes of the upcoming levels and the overall game outcome
(conditional action). From the available resources, they need to decide on which tools or information will help
them reach their objectives efficiently (physical systems). They can test their solutions and the visual
representation of their outcomes can help them analyse their actions (debugging) and correct their approach
(iteration).
14We use cubelets from https://www.modrobotics.com used for the problem-solving #Creacube activity from
https://creamaker.wordpress.com.
15We are thankful to the https://ozobot.fr company who offered a few ozobots and allowed us to perform
some reverse engineering to integrate this robot in our setup.
16Here is teaser text: «We are in 2020 and because of the use of digital the planet is in danger: Too much
consumption of raw materials and energy, possible use of the Internet to question the humanist values of the
peoples of the earth, instead to help develop them; to avoid this, let's go back in time, take up the history of IT,
and redo the path that led to our digital society, so that in your life, and in everyone's life, digital technology
allows us to live better and doing things well».

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 12

playful scenario, which will not be further detailed here, for concision17.

When the game begins all four “rooms” are covered and locked, the player is introduced to the
game via a small video and invited to play, after a consent form is signed (by the player or their
guardian) and a pretest is realized. Then, the player enters the “room” (i.e., the first room cover is
unlocked and by removing the cover the player discovers the labyrinth room).

Temporally the game is structured in activities and each activity is structured into steps:
Presentation of the activity objective (both the gameplay and what is to be learned), iterative time of
solution trial and feedback with more or fewer clues, achievement (including partial achievement),
and proposal of the next activity. Each room has several possible activities, at different levels of
difficulties, that are automatically skipped depending on the previous performances and the
remaining time. At each trial-feedback, the player wins something: Either the activity itself, or some
additional information (and encouragement), or some help.

Fig.2: Top view of the Tabletop gameplay: From left to right, the (i) labyrinth, (ii) recipe, (iii) pixel art and (iv)
cubelet activities. See text for details.

Evaluation methodology

The proposed setup aims to automatically measure the learning activity (through logs of the
mediated activity) which consist of the object sensor trace and screen interaction, thus measuring
the temporal sequence (also called longitudinal) log of the player activity within the different
challenges proposed through the tabletop escape game. 

Spatially, each activity is a rectangular surface on which the player can pick some objects and place
them. The system camera takes a picture and parses the 2D scene, i.e., identifies pertinent objects
at some given locations. The game state at a given time thus corresponds to a 2D configuration of
the planar objects. This technological choice has several advantages: Automatic detection is rather
simple to implement through standard image processing mechanisms 18, running on low-cost
processors. More interesting, the mechanism is easy to understand, so that the detection does not
appear as “magic” but something the player can afford and interact with (and even correct the log
detector if a mistake occurs). A step further, the learning analytics is well defined as a logical
structure (i.e., a so-called JSON structure) as a temporal sequence of an unordered set of 2D
locations and labels, observed at a given time. The algorithmic implementation will be further
discussed in the “Tabletop implementation” section.

In addition, screen interaction consists of looking at web pages with images, clickable “buttons”, and

17It is available at https://aide-line.inria.fr where it can be browsed in detail.
18Here we use the https://opencv.org open multi-platform and multi-language middleware.

Inria

A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 13

small videos (which text is also readable). Player interaction is recorded as a displayed object click,
on a given page, at a given time (as in standard web page learning analytics). 

Temporally, as detailed before, the time is structured into activities, each activity having a
presentation stage (that can be re-run at will) and a trial-feedback loop. Each feedback provides
additional information, this being represented as a multi-scale finite-state automation. The rough
scale has the presentation - trial - feedback states. At a finer scale, each trial-feedback state is
labeled by activity information: The obtained result (e.g., the robot moves, or hits a wall, or
disappears), and the next trial - feedback state to choose. A step further, at the task modeling level,
additional information is to be added such as the precondition knowledge (e.g., understand the
forward instruction) and the postcondition knowledge (e.g., the move size unit is one compartment).

The player learning benefit is to be evaluated from a small pre-test and post-test, and mainly after
the game, after a pause (e.g., another day), by proposing small activities related to what has been
learned. This qualitative benefit evaluation is performed via competence transfer evaluation as
detailed in the sequel. More precisely at a semantic level, we consider

-

In-task observables, measured as detailed in this section, while the content is going to be
made explicit, activity by activity, recorded automatically.

- Debriefing questions to the player, on both the technical content and the related culture,

recorded automatically.

- Competence transfer activities, the transfer activities are proposed after these session

activities with related skills, performed manually with human interaction.

Activity 1: Programming is that easy.

For the first activity, a tiny mobile robot is programmed (Ozobot), as detailed in Fig.3a and Fig.3b,
showing that the same setup leads to several activities with different levels of abstraction. 

The robot itself can be programmed using the following instructions. Either left quarter-turn, right
quarter-turn, or forward of 1, 2, 3 or 4 cells. This is indeed not the only functionalities of this Ozobot,
but it has been restrained to a minimal setup for this basic activity.

Fig. 3a: A tiny robot is programmed, instructions being materialized by handmade wooden cards, arranged in
sequence and detected by the setup camera. The player places the card and has a “start” card to ask the robot
to execute the program. The robot mission is to go on the “key” cell, to open the labyrinth gate, avoid falling

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 14

into the “devil well”, and cross over the tunnel, i.e., infer instructions including for the non-visible part of the
route. 
There are several “good” solutions (i.e., through the tunnel, or using the open-air path on the grid side, with the
possibility
If there is no need to go onto the “key” cell to open the gate, then the solution is even simpler (Turn right,
Forward 4 cells, Turn right) allowing to propose a minimal beginning activity.

“optimal”

solution.

wonder

what

the

to

is

Fig 3B. The view of the conditional part of the path. A door can either obstruct the A gate or the B gate.
Thus, optionally, beyond a simple instruction sequence, a programming gate can randomly either open the A or
B passage. If the A or B state is known before the robot starts, this only involves modifying the instruction
sequence. If this state changes after the robot starts moving, this involves using a conditional expression, as
shown on the right. 

A step further, beyond the present activity, if the robot is hidden in the tunnel at the beginning, not only an ad-
hoc algorithm, but a “generic” algorithm19 has to be proposed that allows it to escape from any labyrinth

19See, for instance, https://scratch.mit.edu/projects/69254134 for a minimal solution, of the form:

 Repeat
 If in front of a wall
 Draw\* a coin
 If the coin is on the head face
 Turn left
 Else
 Turn right
 Else 
 Move forward
 Until way-out

which is known to converge (very slowly but) almost surely to the way out, and has been observed to be easily 
inferred by beginners after proposing the simpler solution:

 Repeat
 If in front of a wall
 Turn [always to the] right\*\*

Inria

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 15

without knowing the labyrinth plan or the robot position. This allows the player to be left facing another level of
abstraction.

The game is “always won”, using the following cues:

-

-

Some verbal explanation about the path to generate, i.e., key to open the gate, turn right to
cross the tunnel.
How to drive the robot to the key cell to open the gate, as a “starter”, info solution is
provided.
A picture of the path under the tunnel, if blocked after the key cell has been reached.
A verbal description of the whole solution to “translate” into code.
A partial solution to complete.
A last, the solution to reproduce by copy.

-
-
-
-
- Otherwise, by some “magic” the game is finally won.

Didactic objectives.

Here we target COMPO3, i.e., formal systems (algorithm) competencies, and COMP5, i.e., program
creation, more precisely “instruction sequence” and “parameter value”, while at a higher level
“conditional expression” is also considered. The general programming paradigm is also
experimented with here: It is to be broken down into 5 steps, (i) consider a problem, (ii) write a
piece of code, (iii) execute it, (iv) analyse the result, (v) reconsider the problem. The key point is that
these didactic ingredients are discovered and carried out to solve what can be a minimal simplest
problem, and then reused to solve problems of increasing complexity. 

Interesting enough, before playing with the robot on the tabletop, an unplugged activity called the
“game of the robot”20 and extensively studied (see, e.g. Romero, Duflot-Kremer, and Vieville 2019)
when one player plays the robot while others “program” it in a 4x4 cells place corresponding to the
game place, could be a fruitful way to start learning the know-how before transferring it to the
tabletop situation.

Scientific culture.

Beyond these know-how skills (savoir-faire) the activity is also designed to share 21 some scientific
knowledge (savoir). 

On one hand,

 we can make explicit some knowledge tokens such as:

 Else 
 Move forward
 Until way-out

which often allows the robot to find a way out, unless trapped in a cavity. This can easily be simulated “under 
the tunnel”, letting the robot run along a virtual (i.e., software calculated) path and then escaping in real life, 
when finding a way out in the virtual labyrinth.
A step further the Pledge algorithm https://interstices.info/lalgorithme-de-pledge (see also 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maze\_solving\_algorithm#Pledge\_algorithm) allows us to solve the problem in a 
much more efficient way, but with a much more complex method.
 (\*) Any random mechanism is suitable here, the only requirement is to randomly change from left to right, to never produce 
the same turn sequence that may correspond to some cyclic path.
 (\*\*) Indeed, it could also be proposed to always turn left, while hesitating between left or right is a lever to find out the idea 
to “change”, i.e., sometimes to the left, sometimes to the right.
20Please consider https://youtu.be/9AtmJ9mTaB0 for a concrete reusable description of the robot game.
21To 
consider:
+ https://project.inria.fr/classcode/profiter-de-classcode-en-postcast/ to see how abstract notion are linked to
historical stories and fixed via everyday life anecdotes and
+ https://youtu.be/lHE-mT0l7pw?t=85 to see another sharing of Al-Kwarizmi story put in perspective.

illustrate how 

 please 

 done 

concretely

concretely

this

is

RR N° 9379

 
 
S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 16

-1- simple algorithms to solve a specific problem are made of a sequence of instructions; 
-2- when problems correspond to variable situations, conditional expressions allow us to take these
changes into account;
-3- some instructions are parameterized by numerical values, e.g., the sequence 
 move-forward-once,

 move-forward-once

 move-forward-once

is
 move-forward-3-times;
-4- instructions have some “algebraic” properties22, i.e., can be simplified, e.g.,

equivalent

to

turn-left

turn-right,

or
 turn-left turn-left turn-left turn-left,
is equivalent to … do nothing, a kind of “zero” instruction, and so on; it is quite interesting to find
such algebraic rules (e.g., turn-left twice is equivalent to turn-right twice) and find out a language to
abstract these rules from what can be observed with the robot;
-5- with instruction sequence, conditional instruction, iterative instruction, and parameter value
assignation, it seems that we can produce generic algorithms (we can produce all possible
algorithms);
and so on.

On the other hand, it is also time to discover two great figures, back to 490-800 AD:
- Aryabhatta was an Indian mathematician and astronomer born in 476 AD. His only surviving work
is called Aryabhatiya, a book that contains mathematical and astronomical theories, including how
the decimal system works. His greatest contribution to mathematics and computer science was the
invention of Zero.
- Al-Khwarizmi was an Iranian mathematician and astronomer born in 780 AD. He introduced Hindu-
Arabic numerals in his famous book titled 'The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion
into mathematics.
and Balancing'.
This double choice allows to show that computer science is not only a western and contemporary
story23, and also shows how science has been built thanks to intelligence sharing between
civilizations. It also shows both the difference between these two formal sciences that are
mathematics and computer science and their deep links. 

the concepts of

introduced 

 algebra 

 He 

Activity evaluation. 

The activity evaluation is developed combining i) in-task observables, ii) debriefing questions to the
player and iii) competence transfer activities.

In-task observables: At the present stage of our study we have identified the following pedagogical
observable, which are:

-

Time until checking the 1st solution and average time between executions.

-

If too long, some clues are proposed, including partial solution, as detailed
previously.

The number of executions of the program, before a solution is proposed. 
The number of times the instructions are viewed again.
Level of clues given to find the solution.

-
-
-
- When a solution is provided, the edit distance 24 between one true and the proposed

is a very concrete example of

 the Integer modulo 4 commutative ring

22This 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring\_(mathematics)#Example:\_Integers\_modulo\_4
23Contemporary scientists from non western countries are also quoted later, such as Maryam Mirzakhani, her
work being of great importance for non-linear data representation and random algorithms, this to avoid the
bias of “long ago, people from non western countries were brilliant” ;(.
24The edit distance https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edit\_distance here the Levenshtein distance is a string
distance for measuring the difference between two sequences. Informally, it is the minimum number of single-
item edits (insertions, deletions or substitutions) required to change one sequence into the other. It also
quantifies the fact the player has found an approximate solution “closed” to a correct one.

Inria

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 17

-

-
-

solution. 
Identification of false but "clever" solutions (e.g., false solutions proposed by several
persons).
Robot moved with the end detection.
This list will be completed after experimenting on a large scale with the first ensemble of
players.

At the didactic level, observables are related to skills expected from the player, e.g.:

-

-

-

Demonstrate a sequencing action 

- Observable: Placing the cards in the right sequence.

Parameter value manipulation

- Observable: Make use of the number of steps for the “forward card”

Use a conditional expression

- Observable: Make an appropriate test choice.
- Observable: Identify the correct sequences as a function of the chosen test.

Beyond, if Ozon gets stuck, the player can analyze the reasons for this and try to fix the problem, by
debugging.

Debriefing questions to the player: To evaluate the computational thinking beans beyond the
activity, the following questions are proposed:

Are there several solutions possible? If yes, what is the optimal one?

How many steps for this algorithm? 

-
- What is the path length as a number of squares? 
-
- What happens if you quarter turn right four times? 
- What happens if you quarter-turn left and right?
- What is the most difficult task? 
- What was Al-Khwarizmi’s original name? 
- What did Aryabhatta invented as a number? 
-

Given this hardware: 

-
-
-

Can the A-closed and B-closed conditions occur simultaneously?
If the A-closed condition is true, what about the B condition?
Could25 
occur
and

B-open

A-open

simultaneously?

These questions are implemented via an online multi-choice quiz, with the possibility to add
comments, to collect learning analytics, and the player can always return to setup and touch it. Then
a “human” collective debriefing to discuss these issues would be of great benefit.

Competence transfer activities: The most sophisticated way to evaluate what has been learlearnednt
is to propose some competence transfer activity, such as:
- Can program the same sequence in a Scratch environment26.
- Can take other conditions into account.
- Can verbalize what is an algorithm at this simple level.
- Realize that true robots are much more complex but not qualitatively more intelligent than Ozon.
- Perform the activity of higher complexity, i.e., propose a general labyrinth way out algorithm.

At this level, we do not consider an automatic evaluation of competence transfer but plan to

25Both responses: no they can’t and yes they can … could be ok ! It depends how we interpret the device, if we
assume the mechanism has only two positions, they can’t, whereas if we consider an intermediate position
(with the door juste between A and B gate) is possible, they can. It is very interesting to explain that both
responses are ok, depending on what is hypothesized.
26The tool is available here https://scratch.mit.edu/projects/417551480/.

RR N° 9379

 
 
 
 
S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 18

perform this manually with human interaction.

Activity 2: When cooking meets computing.

For the second activity, the idea is to formalize a cooking recipe as detailed in Fig.4. 

Didactic objectives. 

Here we target COMPO3, i.e., formal systems (modeling) competencies, and COMP02, i.e., problem
modeling, while the didactic objectives are quite different here: The programming task itself is
intentionally quite obvious, whereas the player is invited to discover and understand several notions
beyond the usual programming. 

The first notion is “modeling” which is the lever of computational thinking: How do we reformulate a
“real-life” issue in such a way that it reduces to an algorithm applied on coded data? Considering the
recipe example, what shall we neglect or forget to concentrate on what needs to be formalized for a
naive- human or robot to succeed in doing the recipe. This is not simply a list of knowledge or how-
to but a complex competence. Depending on the target performing the recipe, the modeling level
differs: Some elements could be obvious or not (e.g., actions or gestures such as “pour” or “mix”
may have to further decompose in more elementary instructions; objects like “dish” or “mold” may
have to be identified by additional cues). In the present activity, a design choice has been made to
offer a playful setup. A step ahead, the player is going to be questioned about this choice. 

Fig. 4. A recipe is formalized, where dry components (flour, and sugared substances such as chocolate or sugar)
are gathered in a dish and wet components (oil, milk, or water, fruit essence and flavours, eggs) gathered in a
bowl, before being poured and mixed in a mold and baked in an oven. This last operation requires a loop, with
the right condition (i.e., while the cake is soft or wet, do bake). The top view shows the “programming area”. The
bottom view shows wood cards for a partially realized recipe. The player is invited to specify a recipe, for a
gnome that is so stupid that we must provide each action with the proper ingredient very precisely, this is

Inria

A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 19

explained on the panel so that the gnome can execute them correctly. Any solution is acceptable, providing that
some constraints are taken into account, for instance: Using flour and a sugary substance, eggs, a liquid and
any essence. Beyond this intentionally simple activity, several computing concepts are introduced, as detailed
in the text. 

Furthermore, several notions beyond the usual basic programming are invoked here:
- Variables have a type, i.e., their value is to be taken in a given set or domain (here some values are
liquid, others are sugared, etc). This is a concrete example allowing to understand that a “value” is
meaningless unless its domain is specified and for numerical values, also the used unit (e.g., is the
milk quantity given in terms of weight (in kilograms or English (or other countries?) pounds?) or
volume (in litre or gallon or other?)).
- Feedback loops allow autocalibration, i.e., automatically adapt a process to an unknown or
unstable parameter value (e.g., instead of baking the cake 10 or 20 or … minutes, which depends on
the oven, the cake weight, etc, we loop on baking it a few minutes until it is dry, the unknown baking
time being also measured and known at the process end). This allows us to understand 
- Some operations are parallelizable, i.e., can be performed in any order, thus in parallel (e.g.,
gathering the elements), while others must be done in sequence (e.g., mix after pour). This notion is
related to the dependency graph, a directed graph representing dependencies of several object
productions towards each other.
- Programmation can be defined “by constraint”, i.e., the algorithm is not explicitly specified by a
sequence of operations but by the desired outcome and specified constraints (e.g., what kind of
ingredients, which possible essence). Then the operation sequence is derived manually (or
automatically).

The game is “always won”, using the following cues:

-

-

Some additional verbal explanation27 about the recipe, 

re-explaining that wet/dry substances gather in the bowl/dish,

-
- making explicit whether each substance is wet (e.g., eggs) or dry (e.g., sugar).

Solution variants are accepted as valid, such as

- mixing the ingredients in the bowl and dish before pouring then in the mold,
-

not making explicit pouring since it is obvious.

- Missing operations are gently reminded, with increasing details, e.g., 
“what about mixing the ingredients in the mold?”
“didn't you forget something?” 

-
-

-

“didn't you forget the essence?” 

-

“didn't you forget the orange essence?” 

A partial solution to complete.
A last, the solution to reproduce by copy.

-
-
- Otherwise, by “chance” the gnome will finally do it.

Scientific culture.

27Some supplementary hints are:

Each ingredient has a special form to fit on the block.

-
- Wet ingredients must be put together in the bowl.
-
-
-
- We must cook while the cake is weak.

Egg and oil, milk or water are wet and must be put in the bowl.
Dry ingredients must be put together in the dish.
Flower, sugar, coconut or chocolate are dry and must be in the dish.

While we may also notice, that in real-life additional constraints have to be taken into account such as:

-
-

Egg must be broken before adding it.
Fruits must be peeled before adding them.

These show that the present game is a simplified model of reality.

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 20

the player

to make 

time allows 

these notions explicit.

Previous modeling issues and related notions are carried out implicitly during the activity. The
overview 
The first pedagogical lever is to develop inductive abstraction by examples. For instance, we notice
the particular fact that ingredients gathering28 order is not important, the action being parallelizable,
and then invite to infer that for several other situations the operation order might (or not) be
important, e.g., addition of numbers, for instance, “1+3+2+4” can be calculated in any order and the
→
first two additions can be done in parallel (1+3 4 in parallel to 2+4 6 and then 4 + 6 
 10).
Understanding what is parallelizable or not helps for instance, organizing human teamwork. 
The second pedagogical lever is to develop generalization by variable values. Very simply, if you
know how to cook a chocolate pound cake, you immediately know how to cook any, say, orange
pound cake or another vanilla and nuts pound cake, providing you create a variable “essence” and
adjust its value. This capability to adapt a given way of doing, here a process, by parameterization is
skill.
another

computational

thinking

useful

quite

→

→

On the other hand, it is also time to discover two great figures of the 19th century, one century
before the computer age.
- Charles Babbage was a mathematician, philosopher and inventor born in 1791 in the UK. He is
often known as the 'Father of Computers' because he provided detailed plans for mechanical
Calculating Engines, Difference Engines, and Analytical Engines, which appears to be the first
computer.
- Ada Lovelace29, born in 1815 in the UK, is known as the first +computer programmer. She
translated an Italian article on Babbage's Analytical Engines, and added her notes on how codes
could be created for a device to handle letters and symbols along with numbers. She also theorized
a method for the engine to repeat a series of instructions (known today as looping) that computer
programs use today.

Activity evaluation. 

In-task observables: At the present stage of our study we have identified the following pedagogical
observables, which are, as for activity 1, time until checking the first solution and average time
between trials, number of trials before finding a correct solution, the distance between the
proposed solution and a correct one. In addition, specific observables are identified:
 - originality of the solution (for solutions proposed by other persons)
 - predefined errors identification (inversion of blocks, improper choice of location, block forgotten).

At the didactic level, observables are related to skills expected from the player, e.g.:

-

-

-

-

-

-

Understand the ingredient type constraints.

- Observable: Properly associate ingredients and action parameters.

Understand the action causality.

- Observable: Put related actions in the correct order.

Understand the wet/dry ingredient parallel treatment.

- Observable: Put ingredients together correctly, put them in the right container.

Understand the cooking loop.

- Observable: Introduce the cooking in the loop and choose the correct condition.
Understand the difference and importance of sequential and parallel steps in a process

- Observable are those of items 2 and 3.

Realize that the same plan recipe or plan, can produce various results depending on the
variable values.

- Observable: Redo a variant of the recipe by simply changing some ingredients.

28Cooking chief might counter-argue that it might not be exactly the same to gather flour before, say, sugar
that the reverse, here by separating dry and wet elements before mixing, we are on the safe side, regarding
usual cooking at home.
29See https://youtu.be/lHE-mT0l7pw?t=149 for an example of a video presentation of this scientist.

Inria

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 21

Debriefing questions to the player: To evaluate the computational thinking beans beyond the
activity, the following questions are proposed:

-
-

-
-

-

How many operations to do the recipe? 
If two gnomes make the recipe together how to share the operations?

- Which one can not be shared? 

Give an example of two operations you can invert, and two you can not. 
If you redo a coconut strawberry cake instead of this one, do you need to redesign
everything? 

-

If not what do you change? 

Considering the different possible ingredients in the box, how many kinds of cake can the
gnome make?
Are “lemon” and “pear” of the same data type? And what about “sugar” and “milk”?

-
- What is the type of elements represented by a circular chip?
-
- What was the main scientific contribution of Ada Lovelace?
- What did Charles Babbage plan to do?

How to know the best cooking time using the proposed loop?

Competence transfer activities: The most sophisticated way to evaluate what has been learned is to
propose some competence transfer activity, such as understanding what is a variable is a skill

- Washing machine modeling ;) for instance: 

-

-
-
-

the washing machine temperature is a variable, 

-
-
-

allowing to wash different kind of clothes,
using the same washing sequence, but the water temperature,
physical reasons to adjust the water temperature could be challenged;

there is another quantitative variable (the spin-drying speed);
there are also qualitative variables (e.g., pre-washing cycle or not) ;
not only women can use such a machine, whatever the complexity is, because, with
computational thinking formation, even men would likely be able to.

-

In Scratch variable notions is also widely used at a different level30:
- modify a parameter (e.g, move 50 and not 30 pixels),
-
-

creates a variable (e.g. the speed of the sprite) and set/get it,
understand the difference between quantitative (e.g. turns 85, degrees left) and
qualitative (e.g,. quarter-turn, u-turn, …),
uses this variable in a process,
design a “function”. i.e. a process that is parameterized by some input variable
value.

-
-

As for the previous activity, in-task observables correspond to online measures, debriefing questions
to post-test, and competence transfer is related to learning sequences beyond the present study.

Activity 3: playing with pixels to twig coding.

This activity, described in Fig.5., is not related to algorithms and programming but to the other main
chapter of informatics initiation, namely information representation and data coding. The activity is
usually performed31 between two players, while only a reduced form is considered here, since we
have to measure learning analytics, and want to focus on the didactic aspects of the activity.

When performed between two players, the instructions are minimal for the two players to solve the

30This is illustrated with several examples here: https://scratch.mit.edu/studios/27331752/ 
31See http://tinyurl.com/y8btzny7 for a description.

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 22

“transmission” problem: Here, «one player draws a pixel art without showing it, and can only say
any number of “0” or “1” to transmit it to the other player that has to redraw it». Both players have
to discuss together how to do it. They have to agree on how to code (i.e., the “0” and “1” pixel
correspondence, the pixel encoding sequencing, not necessarily from left to right and top to
bottom). This is a very interesting problem-solving situation. 
Sometimes, the players “cheat” in some very interesting manner to encourage: instead of repeating,
e.g., “00001” for instance, they say “four 0, 1”, enriching the initial coding language. When this
happens, it is an opportunity to notice that it was not the initial rule, but an improved one.
Sometimes, the players also develop some protocol to ensure that the code is properly transferred,
even in noisy environments: Repeating the sequence, or feedbacking what has been received by the
receiver, for the emitter to check. Another example is two kids who wanted to transmit not only two
color pixel art, but multicolor, thus invented a specific code to this end.
Furthermore, errors are very interesting situations, it is first an opportunity to remind about the
pedagogical interest of making errors: «who makes no errors learns nothing new, but simply
remains on what is learned before»; an error is a feedback 32 that allows her or him to adjust his or
her behavior to improve it. Some errors are demonstrative, if, for instance, the pixels are drawn
from right to left instead of left to write, the result corresponds to the original picture via a
reflectional symmetry. If the result was a ‘5’ it will look like a ‘2’, if the result was a ‘0’ it will look like
itself, providing an interesting way to make concrete geometry.

Fig.5. A 5 x 5 pixel art picture can be built to be binary encoded, for instance:
 0001 01000 00100 00001 00000 (green squares are encoded with ‘0’ and orange squares with ‘1’),
corresponds to our view of the picture visible here, reading from left to right and top to bottom.
The decoding exercise 
 0111010101101010111011011 (which corresponds to a kind of imp),
and
The encoding exercise consists of drawing a pixel art picture of your choice and then binary encodes it.

considering a binary 

corresponding

sequence,

consists

picture.

draw

pixel

 of

say,

the

art

to

Didactic objectives.

We target COMPO3 formal systems (information coding) competencies here, including coding and
decoding of information, image pixel, binary code, transmission of information, and to some extent
COMP05, i.e., creation (not of a program but oa digital object).
The basic notions to be understood regarding information coding in link with this activity are the
following:
- Atom of information: Any couple of values (e.g., “0”/”1” or “yes”/”no” or “true”/”false”) allows to
define the minimal information token, i.e., an atom of information. This can be experimented with

32This is also entirely true and completely formalized in machine algorithmic learning, based on supervised
learning examples, or reinforcement learning reward.

Inria

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 23

by playing the well-known “guess who?” game (as an example), which also provides the opportunity
to understand the dichotomy33.
- Information additivity: Two disjoint, i.e., non-redundant information add, e.g., being a human, and
being old, contrary to induced information, e.g., being a boy, and being a human. This has a
probabilistic interpretation (the probability of the union of two disjoint events add) but is also true
at the computational level, for instance, considering the number of bits to encode it.
- Arbitrariness of coding: It is entirely equivalent to encode, say, green or orange colors with “0” and
“1” or vice-versa, the only important point is that we agree on the chosen standard. A lot of technical
words such as “.mp3” or “.jpeg” named standardized formats to encode sound or images. The UTF-8
standard, for instance, encodes almost 250000 letters and characters of any human language. 
- Information weight and size: The “raw” information weight is the number of bits to encode the
related data, since the data is often redundant the information size is often lower, as it can be
measured for instance, using a zip lossless compression algorithm, while other compressions (such
as those used in “.mp3” or “.jpeg” formats are lossy, neglecting information that is not or dimly
perceived by the human auditory or visual system).

Scientific culture.

On one hand, beyond the previous didactic objectives, the player is invited to realize all information
is coded in binary, including, say, emotions34, understanding that coding the emotion in the
machine, and even simulating them, does not mean that the machine feels the emotion. 
The fact that all human information can be coded as a sequence of binary bits yields a revolution. In
a nutshell:
-

Generic mechanisms to memorize, transmit, compress, crypt, information can now be
applied to text, images, sounds, videos, and any data. This is also the case for machine
learning mechanisms, which qualitatively change what can be done with our information.
This has also negative consequences, such as data perennity. 
Because all information does not need specific support (e.g., an image does not need to be
stored on a silver halide photograph, music on a vinyl record or magnetic tape) the copy
cost becomes negligible and is no more a rival good 35. This completely changes economical
models and has a huge environmental impact.
For all encoded information to be reusable and interoperable, it must be standard
compliant. All countries in the world, including countries at war, have accepted to follow
informatics standards. Some companies' commercial policies, like Apple or Microsoft, have
been based on “proprietary format” so that customer data was “trapped” on their systems; it
was finally not tenable and open format is now widely used.

-

-

Understanding how information is coded in digital systems allows us to better understand these
disruptive effects of informatics on many societal aspects. Interestingly, scientific culture is here
multidisciplinary linking computer science concepts to human and social sciences.

On the other hand, it is also time to discover two great figures 36 of the 20th century, at the origin of
the computer age.

33Dichotomic search is a general algorithmic principle allowing to optimally search an element in a sorted set. 
34Considering, e,g., the Plutchik 3D model of emotions https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plutchik-wheel.svg as
explained here https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert\_Plutchik#Plutchik's\_wheel\_of\_emotions, the 32 emotions
considered as discrete categories (which is a modeling choice), can be encoded with 5 bits, 2 coding the
emotion intensity, 1 the emotion antagonists, 2 coding the emotion basic type.
35A rival good https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rivalry\_(economics) consumption by one consumer prevents
simultaneous consumption by other consumers, which is not the case for a joke ;) or a digital object.
36See https://youtu.be/3YrmbBsh2Ig for a presentation of both characters, in their historical context, and
https://tinyurl.com/yd3h99sk to see how the link between these persons and computer science concepts are
proposed.

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 24

- Alan Turing was a British scientist and pioneer in computer science born in 1912. During World
War II, he developed the Turing Machine which helped break the German Enigma code. He mainly
understood what a machine can execute and what it can not, showing the limits of what can be
calculated by an algorithm. Even so, he believed in artificial intelligence.
- Grace Hopper was born in 1906 in the USA. During World War II, she worked in computing for the
US Navy. After the war, she led a team that created the first computer language compiler, which led
to the creation of the popular COBOL (stands for Common Business-Oriented Language - a
compiled computer programming language similar to English) language.

Activity evaluation. 

In-task observables: At the present stage of our study we have identified the same pedagogical
observable as for the previous activities.

At the didactic level, observables are related to skills expected from the player, e.g.:

-

-

-

Create an image using 0 and 1, and make her/his choice.

- Observable: Being able to create a pixel art of her/his choice without blocking on the

“but what do I have to work.

Understand how pixels work.

- Observable: Being able to create a 5 digit by putting squares on the grid (any form

that is like a 5 is ok).

Understand that a picture with pixels can be encoded with 0 and 1.

- Observable: Ability to redraw the pixel art from a 0 / 1 sequence.

- Make the competence transfer to encode an existing drawing.

- Observable: Do the coat of arms proper encoding.

Debriefing questions to the player: To evaluate the computational thinking beans beyond the
activity, the following questions are proposed:

-
-

-
-
-

-

-

If I draw an S, but encode it from right to left, what symbol will it look lik? 
Suppose each pixel can be red, blue or magenta (red + blue mixed): How many bits (i.e. 0/1)
do we need for each pixel? 
If I made a mistake between 0 and 1, what happens? 
If I have a 5 x 4 pixel art grid, how many 0/1 do I need to encode it?
If I encode the grid from right to left and others who decode also consider right to left, is the
picture going to be correct?
The main contribution of Grace Hopper was the creation of a compiler. It translates a
human-readable computer language into … what? 

-

[another

binary

code

human
that

language,

the

 machine

can 

execute,

 a secret code that no machine can decode]

The main Alan Turing contribution was to understand what a machine can calculate, one of
these assertions is wrong, which one?

-

[a computer machine can execute only algorithms

a computer machine can execute all
Some problems

can not

 be 

 possible algorithms
 algorithms

solved by

 any problems of any kind can be solved by algorithms]

Competence transfer activities: The most sophisticated way to evaluate what has been learned is to
propose some competence transfer activity, such as:

-

Pixel encoding on other situations, e.g.:

-

-

Draw a pixel art using another mechanism, e.g., clicking on the screen, as proposed
here https://scratch.mit.edu/projects/69242142
Use pixel art drawing to observe some phenomenon such as random generation, as
proposed here https://scratch.mit.edu/projects/287569868

Inria

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 25

-

Apply pixel encoding/decoding on 

-
-

-

other pixel art array (e.g., 4 x 5) or 
using another binary vocabulary (e.g. O||O|OO…or YNNYYNNY… (for yes
and no)) or 
another encoding, e.g., 

three bits Red Green Blue to generate 8 colors

-
- with the possibility to insert digits for bit repetition (e.g. 0111001

-

Encode not a pixel art but another digital object, e.g.,

becomes 031201)

-
-
-

the activity 1 algorithmic sequence using F L R (for forward, left or right)
a multi-drump sequence, 
a navigation North/West/South/East navigation algorithm.

As for the previous activities, in-task observables correspond to online measures, debriefing
questions to post-test, and competence transfer to related to learning sequences beyond the
present study.

Activity 4: the crea’cube problem-solving test.

The last activity consists of « building a vehicle made up of four pieces that moves by itself from
the red point to the black point » (instructions can be heard again by pressing the button), as shown
in Fig. 6. It has been extensively detailed in (Romero, David, and Lille 2018), thus not redeveloped
here.

Didactic objectives. 

The following CT competencies are targeted: 

-

-

-

-

Analyse a problem situation and imagine the way a set of 4 cubes can be used to solve the
challenge (COMPO1) through the creation of an autonomous train (COMPO2). 
Understand the importance of the order in a sequence (system behavior defined by the
order of the different cubes) (COMPO3)
Understand basic physical systems components (COMPO4): cubes assembled as a system,
distance sensor, movement actuator (servo-motor + wheels), electric circuit
Engage in computational thinking as a problem-solving activity requiring the creation and
test of a solution (COMPO5) and the iterative improvement of it based on the problems
observed (COMPO6)

As illustrated in Fig. 7.

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 26

Fig. 6. Four cubelets have to be assembled to form a vehicle that moves from the red to the black blob. This is
an open, voluntarily ill-defined, task allowing the player to develop problem-solving and creativity skills.

Fig. 7. Targeted competencies in relation to the computational thinking framework as developed in (Romero,
Lepage, and Lille 2017).

More details are available in (Romero, David, and Lille 2018).

Scientific culture.

On one hand, the problem-solving situation is a great opportunity to wonder how a machine would
learn to solve such a complex task, i.e., to compare natural and artificial intelligence 37 (Alexandre et
al. 2020). Thinking about how the task could be solved “mechanically” is a very interesting way of
thinking in a reflective way how a human brain can solve it systematically. 

Learning to verbalize mental operation, is a key of what is called metacognition (Lachaux n.d.)
(Diamond and Ling 2016), and it is proposed here to make a profit of this particular setup to not
only perform the activity as a subject but use this activity to initiate a mechanism of learning to
learn.

37A large audience citizen formation https://classcode.fr/iai has been proposed and widely shared with a focus
on the links between artificial and natural intelligence as quoted here,

Inria

A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 27

On the other hand, it is also time to discover two great figures of the early 21st century, Yann André
LeCun is a French computer scientist working primarily in the fields of machine learning, computer
vision, mobile robotics, and computational neuroscience. He is well known for his work on optical
character recognition and computer vision using convolutional neural networks (CNN), and one of
the fathers of deep learning, i.e., numerical artificial intelligence.

Rose Dieng Kuntz was a Senegalese computer scientist born in 1956. Her research primarily focused
on sharing knowledge over the World Wide Web, and she specialized in semantic web models of
knowledge, i.e., symbolic artificial intelligence.

Activity evaluation. 

In-task observables: The observables related to this activity have been detailed and discussed in
(Romero et al 2020), and are not reproduced here, but reviewed in Fig. 8. However, in the present
implementation of the activity, we introduce a new paradigm regarding this activity evaluation:
monitor38 the activity by the previous player. 

Fig.8. Observable of the crea’cube activity: the cube complete configurations F\*\* or partial assembly AS\*\*, 
particular usage U\*\*, general behavior B\*\*, observed emotion E\*\*, discovered affordances AF\*\*, generated 
production P\*\* and terminal state T\*\* correspond to the discrete categorization of the experimental states. 
They are recorded with the precise instant of occurrence. They are measured offline on a video recording of the
experiment. In the present modified paradigm, each configuration is presented on the tabletop, and either a 
human observer or a machine learning algorithm is identified in real-time in the experimental state.

The idea is to invite a player to master the next player activity, after the debriefing session,
proposed below. This not only allows to save experimenter time but is a real lever for the former
player to better understand how she or he performed the problem-solving task, i.e., it is an
interesting way to learn how to learn.

38This idea has been introduced because automatic recognition of the 3D configuration is not fully operational,
however, due to the intrinsic interest of this fallback solution, we maintain it even if the implemented machine
learning mechanism is efficient enough.

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 28

The role of the former player is simply to passively record in real-time the different configurations,
and other elements of the experiment as shown in Fig. 8.
Of course, an experimenter must supervise the binome, to check that the former player does not
simply provide the solution (because of, e.g., lack of patience) or disturb the player (because, e.g.,
envious of a better efficacy), and previous data collected after a passive video recording will allow us
to observe to which extent this introduces a bias at the player level.

Debriefing questions to the player: To auto-evaluate the computational thinking skills summoned
during the activity, the following questions are proposed:
Did you, the player, find the solution by chance? 

-
- Which cues did help understanding how to assemble the cubelets?
- What was the “spurs” (i.e., the critical cue) that allowed you, the player, to find out one

-

-

-

aspect of the solution?
According to the experiment state definition (shown here in Fig.8), how would qualify your
emotion at the beginning, middle and end of your session?
Looking at the collected learning analytics, to which extent do you agree or what would you
propose to correct?
How would a player advise another (without providing the solution) if stuck at the beginning
activity?
of

the

Competence transfer activities: This aspect is not treated and is an interesting perspective of the
present work.

Designing a modular automatically monitored tabletop

Position of the problem

We are in front of the following challenge: Design a tangible device, low-cost and as much as
possible using recycling material, for which the construction and following upkeep can be done by
makers with a relatively low level of technicity. Furthermore, we want teachers (in the wide sense) to
be able to derive or redesign their activity, possibly not only in relation to computational thinking
initiation. 

To take up the challenge we have considered both open-hardware and open-software productions.
The key point is that the method allows a low-cost reproduction of the tabletop or any variant, and
is easily reusable for other setups.

Open-hardware production

The present mechanical realization is made of standard woodworking, using recycled wood, it is
nothing more than a crate with a double bottom, the electronic being in the cellar and the gameplay
space above. 
Regarding the object animation, low-cost electronics has been considered, with standard angular
and linear servo-motors and a low-cost EPS32 controller, as sketched out in Fig. 9. This last choice
(for instance, Arduino) allowed a lower cost, better performance and easy control via a wifi web-
service interface. This component is used in connected objects. It is not obvious to make use of it,
but it is now shared with a complete interface software which makes it completely obvious to
integrate without any code development.

Inria

 
 
A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 29

Fig. 9. A schematic description of the hardware design choices, using low-cost easily reusable
hardware components, see text for details.

10.

photo

gallery.

Hardware

top view of

to provide a 

Fig.
A: The Raspberry computer tablet computer mounted on a carriage with the image analysis camera Raspicam
mounted on a pole 
the gameplay space.
B: A view of the worksite, showing that everything has been built with standard craft tools.
C and D: Detailed views of an automatic gate between two rooms, with the controller stick in the cellar part of
the box.
E and F: Detailed views of the locker mechanism, the bolt fastener has been produced on a 3D printer in a
maker-space.
G: A view of the game board before putting it in place, all decoration is printed on a contact paper stuck on a
thin wooden plank. 
H and I: Detailed view of the wagon mechanism allowing the tablet to move along the game sequence.
J: A view of the setup when closed, allowing to easily move it from one place to another.

RR N° 9379

 
 
 
 
 
 
S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 30

The controllers drive angular servo motors that open or close gates during the activity and linear
actuators that allow to lock or unlock the bolts. 
Each box, corresponding to each activity room, is initially locked with two bolts, as shown in Fig,9.
This latter function works fine but is not the cheapest one and seems fragile: We advise
implementing another solution in the next version, e.g., a number padlock which combination is
revealed when it is time to open it.
A step further, as visible in Fig.11 and Fig.10, the tablet is mounted on a wagon that moves along a
rail to automatically position the computer and top-view camera on the right position. This works,
but is the second fragile part of the system, and cost may be reduced by simply considering four
fixed cameras and manual manipulation of the tablet. 
The main component is a Raspberry computer, installed at a low-cost (<200€) SunFounder RasPad
tablet with a Raspicam camera mounted on a pole to provide a top-view of the gameplay space, as
shown in Fig. 10. It also has a control card to drive the continuous motors of the wagon.
All the gameplay board and decoration is simply made out of contact papers stuck on thin wooden
planks or on the box walls, which appears to be a rather low-cost solution contacting a printing
shop, for which it is a very standard service.

Fig. 11. Global top view of the present realization showing how the game runs from one escape room to
another, each cover being unlocked when the previous activity is done, while the tablet mounted on a wagon
with the top-view camera automatically follows the player.

This not only provides a rather low-cost solution but also a quite nice result for a rather small
amount of work time. Beyond a non-negligible investment for finding this solution, producing the
whole hardware is a one day work to buy the wood and electronic components (the latter being all
available online with easy delivery), one day to build the wood structure and one day to mount the
inside part of the setup. 

As being an open hardware production, all files39 (general plans with dimensions, list of components
with (non-exhaustive !) link to buy them, files to produce the 3D elements and contact paper).

The level of competence for the woodwork is that of a handywoman or handyman, using home craft
tools. The level of competence for the electronic is of the same level, some welding and wiring are to
be realized. The best solution is perhaps to join a maker space or a fab lab and perform the
realization in this context. This is what we did.

Open-software production

39Refer to https://gitlab.inria.fr/line/aide-group/aide/blob/master/etc/install\_hardware.md for details.

Inria

A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 31

To offer the most flexible and easy to use, develop and derive software, we have designed a
relatively general architecture, detailed in Fig. 12. At the outset, the architecture is made of three
elements: (i) The experiment setup, (ii) The data analysis machine and (iii) the software development
repository. 

Fig.12. The system architecture. In blue are the Raspberry (RPi) components that run the experiment setup:
drivers of the different hardware components, web pages to interact with the player, algorithms and local data
storage. This section is connected via a local secure wifi connection to any desktop computer. In green the two
external machines, one is a virtual secured machine to store all data and perform data analysis, the other is the
software development repository. See text for more details.

To understand in-depth how this works, let us detail the different elements.

General software features. The AIDE software40 bundle is defined as a set of factories, i.e., a set of
simple static functions that encapsulate41 all the implementation complexity and classes, i.e., digital
objects (i.e., an Image or the Tabletop interface) with parameters to define their properties and
methods to activate some functionalities.
It is shared under the CeCILL-C (a BSD-line license compatible with French regulation rules) for the
code and CC-BY licenses for the other resources.
The core is programmed in C/C++ for both efficiency and capability to interact with other
programming languages, mainly:

-

-

Python for which all classes and factories are wrapped allowing to write code with this
language (not often used).
Javascript for which all needed functions are wrapped42 and used via a string interface.
The applicative layers and user interface are designed in HTML5/CSS and programmed in JavaScript.
This choice has several advantages: It is easy to create since many of us know how to create web
pages, users are familiar with Web pages interactions, browsers environment offers many
multimedia features, it runs everywhere (e.g., it can be developed on a standard computer before

 https://gitlab.inria.fr/line/aide-group/aide/-/blob/master/README.md and documented at

40Available at 
http://aide-line.inria.fr.
41The http://aide-line.inria.fr/build/www/sys.html lists all used system functionalities, lightning the use of the
middleware underneath.
42See http://aide-line.inria.fr/build/www/wrapperService.html for wrapped functions details.

RR N° 9379

 
S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 32

running on the setup, or an internet demo version can be shared), it can be used in remote
configurations (i.e., setup driven by a host computer), it allows to produce hybrid (unplugged and
online) activities. A toolbox is provided to ease the use of this design choice, as explained next.

To manipulate symbolic information we make intensive use of generic data structure, for both
defining the parameters or obtaining the processing results. Very simply we can define, t-uples (also
called table, or dictionary or associative array) of values of the form
other-name:

next-value

name:

value

{

 for 

instance,

 to web-service URL query, and 

Corresponding,
 [ first-value second-value, …],
each value being itself a t-uple, a list, a textual string, a number or a boolean (i.e., with either true or
false value). This corresponds to a weak syntax JSON43 data structure. We provide such detail here,
because each user (from developers to data analyser) has to understand this simple knowledge
representation. 

 …},
list of the form

Local server/client mechanisms. A second design choice is to consider the user interface via Web
pages, as discussed previously, with the difficulty that a Web page is (hopefully) not allowed to freely
interact with the host computer, for obvious security reasons. Here to manage this issue, we
designed a minimal client/server mechanism, both sides written in JavaScript to limit the amount of
technology, the server-side using node.js middleware. The service provides the capability to have
remnant data local service (i.e., save and load data structures), and drive all tabletop hardware and
software functions, while wrapping functions are easily extended. A very simple interface 44 is
designed encapsulating all required elements.

Hardware components drivers. Actuators (linear or angular servo-motors) or motors (continuous
servo-motors) are driven either by ESP32 controllers, via a wifi web-service, or the RPi servo card, via
the Python Adafruit standard library. The Ozobot is connected to the infrared interface and also
driven via a Python middleware. The other devices (camera, audio and video input and output,
tactile screen) are driven by the RPi standard drivers or middleware. This rather complex
mechanism is entirely encapsulated in the tabletop low-level driver factory 45, that takes all
underlying tasks (e.g., initialization, finalization, error detection) into account. This low-level
interface has been designed to be entirely reusable.
At a higher level, all commands of the present setup are encapsulated in simple commands to open
or close gates, lock or unlock covers, and so on, for instance:
 tabletop.wagonMove(distance);
to move the wagon supporting the tablet a certain calibrated distance.

Image processing implementation. The image processing is based on the https://opencv.org
middleware, reusing all available functionalities with two add-ons:

-

-

Fast implementation in C/C++ of the application-specific algorithms or combinations of
existing algorithms to maximize the performances.
A high-level interface to use these functions without directly manipulating the non-trivial
openCV data structures.

 An image46 is made of a `photo`, which is assigned from some source (e.g., a camera, a file, an
assignment from another image), with additional channels calculated by the implemented
algorithms (e.g., color hue, thresholding, …) and providing parameters extracted from the image

43The JSON data structure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON requires a rather strong heavy syntax, while a
weak syntax parser http://aide-line.inria.fr/build/www/wJSON.html#.parse has been implemented to facilitate
writing and reading such data.
44See http://aide-line.inria.fr/build/www/client.html on the client side and on the server-side http://aide-
line.inria.fr/build/www/httpService.html.
45The use is documented here: http://aide-line.inria.fr/build/www/Tabletop-driver.html and all hardware
functions are available here: http://aide-line.inria.fr/build/www/Tabletop.html.
46The data structure and functions are documented here http://aide-line.inria.fr/build/www/Image.html.

Inria

 
 
 
 
 
A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 33

and channels.

The main required image processing mechanisms are:

-

-

-

-

Image rectification, i.e., perform a perspective transformation of the image to work on a
gameboard top view, even if the camera is tilted.
Image mapping, i.e., localize the present grabbed image for another reference image after
the large translation of the setup wagon and small deformations (i.e., namely a 2D affine
transform) due to optic imperfection, and light condition transformation.
Thumbnail image recognition, i.e., recognizes among a predefined set of reference
thumbnails corresponding to the different game card, which one (or none) has been set.
Stable image detection, i.e., detect if something is moving (e.g., the player hands over the
game board) or if the image is stable.

This has been implemented using standard image processing mechanisms since we are in a rather
specific situation where known 2D objects have to be recognized. This only allows to partially
estimate the 3D cubelets configuration in the fourth activity, and a companion project using
machine learning mechanisms will complete the present implementation, beyond the present limits.

The key point here is that all functionalities are parameterized via a JSON data structure, so that
they can be easily usable without imperative programming, e.g., using a web service.

Conclusion

This preliminary study allowed us to extensively experiment to which extent we can design and
implement a low-cost tabletop set-up to collect learning analytics during computational thinking
unplugged or tangible activities.

By low-cost, we mean the reproduction of the open hardware. For one activity, the order of
magnitude is something like 100€ to 200€ of electronic components, depending on the activity, and
10€ of a laminated poster, the wood being easily obtained from recycled material. The software is
free and open. The assembly time is about one day. 

The software has indeed been designed to be efficient, reuse a maximal number of existing
libraries, and rather simple to use, without any strong knowledge in C/C++ programming, just calling
methods as in any other languages. Wrapping to Python or Javascript is proposed. It is fully modular
to be reusable on other activity boxes.

After experimenting with several solutions, we concluded that the next generation will have a
simpler hardware design, with the idea to use an external computer connected to the tabletop with
fixed cameras, the processing being partially performed on the host computer. The software
architecture is entirely distributed allowing this mutation with a minimal evolution of the code. 
No mistake, this is only a prototype and this document only reports the first steps of design and
construction of the setup and the related activities. Much work is still to be done to validate and
experiment with the setup. 

References

Alexandre, Frédéric, Jade Becker, Marie-Hélène Comte, Aurelie Lagarrigue, Romain Liblau, Margarida

Romero, and Thierry Viéville. 2020. “Open Educational Resources and MOOC for Citizen 

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 34

Understanding of Artificial Intelligence.” https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03024034.

Banihashem, Seyyed Kazem, Khadijeh Aliabadi, Saeid Ardakani, Ali Delavar, and Mohammadreza 
Ahmadabadi. 2018. “Learning Analytics: A Systematic Literature Review” 9 (June). 
https://doi.org/10.5812/ijvlms.63024.

Cassone, Laura, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville, Cindy De Smet, and Mbemba Ndiaye. 2019. 

Proceedings of the ANR #CreaMaker Workshop: Co-Creativity, Robotics and Maker 
Education. https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02362121.

Clement, Benjamin, Didier Roy, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, and Manuel Lopes. 2015. “Multi-Armed Bandits
for Intelligent Tutoring Systems.” ArXiv:1310.3174 [Cs], June. http://arxiv.org/abs/1310.3174.

Curzon, Paul, Mark Dorling, Thomas Ng, Cynthia Selby, and John Woollard. 2014. “Developing 

Computational Thinking in the Classroom: A Framework.” 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/e4f3/c24924c5a707a196b2015494c829c15618d1.pdf.

Diamond, Adele, and Daphne S. Ling. 2016. “Conclusions about Interventions, Programs, and 

Approaches for Improving Executive Functions That Appear Justified and Those That, despite
Much Hype, Do Not.” Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, Flux Congress 2014, 18 (April):
34–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.11.005.

Gottlieb, Jacqueline, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Manuel Lopes, and Adrien Baranes. 2013. “Information-

Seeking, Curiosity, and Attention: Computational and Neural Mechanisms.” Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 17 (11): 585–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.001.

Huang, Wendy, and Chee-Kit Looi. 2020. “A Critical Review of Literature on ‘Unplugged’ Pedagogies 

in K-12 Computer Science and Computational Thinking Education.” Computer Science 
Education 0 (0): 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1080/08993408.2020.1789411.

Lachaux, Jean-Philippe. n.d. “Éduquer la métacognition, la clé du succès pour les enfants.” 

cerveauetpsycho.fr. Pour la Science. Accessed November 15, 2020. 
https://www.cerveauetpsycho.fr/sr/ecole-des-cerveauxeduquer-la-metacognition-la-cle-du-
succes-pour-les-enfants-15209.php.

Leeuwen, Anouschka van, Nikol Rummel, and Tamara van Gog. 2019. “What Information Should 
CSCL Teacher Dashboards Provide to Help Teachers Interpret CSCL Situations?” 
International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 14 (3): 261–89. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-019-09299-x.

Lodi, Michael. 2020. “Introducing Computational Thinking in K-12 Education: Historical, 

Epistemological, Pedagogical, Cognitive, and Affective Aspects.” Theses, Dipartimento di 
Informatica - Scienza e Ingegneria, Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di Bologna. 
https://hal.inria.fr/tel-02981951.

Menon, Divya, Sowmya BP, Margarida Romero, and Thierry Viéville. 2019. “Going beyond Digital 
Literacy to Develop Computational Thinking in K-12 Education.” In Smart Pedagogy for 
Digital Learning. Routledge.

Menon, Divya, and Margarida Romero. 2019. “Game Mechanics Supporting a Learning and Playful 

Experience in Educational Escape Games.” In . https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-7998-2015-
4.ch007.

Menon, Divya, Margarida Romero, and Thierry Viéville. 2019a. “Going beyond Digital Literacy to 

Develop Computational Thinking in K-12 Education,.” In Smart Pedagogy of Digital Learning, 
edited by Linda Daniela. Taylor&Francis (Routledge). https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02281037.

———. 2019b. “Computational Thinking Development and Assessment through Tabletop Escape 

Games.” International Journal of Serious Games 6 (November). 
https://doi.org/10.17083/ijsg.v6i4.319.

Mukhopadhyay, S. C. 2015. “Wearable Sensors for Human Activity Monitoring: A Review.” IEEE 
Sensors Journal 15 (3): 1321–30. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2014.2370945.

Nezami, Omid Mohamad, Mark Dras, Len Hamey, Deborah Richards, Stephen Wan, and Cecile Paris. 
2019. “Automatic Recognition of Student Engagement Using Deep Learning and Facial 
Expression.” ArXiv:1808.02324 [Cs], July. http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02324.

Prokofieva, Victoria, Svetlana Kostromina, Sofia Polevaia, and Fabien Fenouillet. 2019. 

“Understanding Emotion-Related Processes in Classroom Activities Through Functional 
Measurements.” Frontiers in Psychology 10 (October). 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02263.

Reimann, Peter. 2009. “Time Is Precious: Variable- and Event-Centred Approaches to Process 

Analysis in CSCL Research.” International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative 
Learning 4 (3): 239–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-009-9070-z.

Romero, Margarida. 2017. “Les Compétences Pour Du XXe Siècle.” Usages Créatifs Du Numérique 
Pour l’apprentissage Au XXIe Siècle.. Québec: Presses de l’Université Du Québec.

Romero, Margarida, Frédéric Alexandre, Thierry Viéville, and Gérard Giraudon. 2020. “Des 

Inria

A low-cost tabletop game to collect learning analytic during 
 computational thinking using unplugged or tangible activities 35

Neurosciences Computationnelles Aux Sciences de l’éducation Computationnelles Pour La 
Modélisation Du Cerveau de l’apprenant et Du Contexte de l’activité d’apprentissage.” 
Bulletin de l’Association Française d’Intelligence Artificielle, no. 108: 24–27.
Romero, Margarida, Dayle David, and Benjamin Lille. 2018. “CreaCube, a Playful Activity with 

Modular Robotics.” In Games and Learning Alliance. Palermo, IT.

Romero, Margarida, and Marie Duflot. 2018. “À Gauche Ou à Droite Du Robot ? Test de Perspective 

Décentrée Gauchedroite Par Le Biais d’une Activité Sur Papier et d’une Activité de Robotique
Pédagogique.” In CIRTA 2016.

Romero, Margarida, Marie Duflot-Kremer, and Thierry Vieville. 2019. “Le Jeu Du Robot : Analyse 

d’une Activité d’informatique Débranchée Sous La Perspective de La Cognition Incarnée.” 
Review of Science, Mathematics and ICT Education 13 (1): 35–49. 
https://doi.org/10.26220/rev.3089.

Romero, Margarida, Alexandre Lepage, and Benjamin Lille. 2017. “Computational Thinking 

Development through Creative Programming in Higher Education.” International Journal of 
Educational Technology in Higher Education 14 (December). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-
017-0080-z.

Romero, Margarida, Benjamin Lille, Thierry Viéville, Marie Duflot-Kremer, Cindy de Smet, and David 
Belhassein. 2018. “Analyse comparative d’une activité d’apprentissage de la programmation 
en mode branché et débranché.” In . https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01861732.

Romero, Margarida, Stephanie Noirpoudre, and Thierry Viéville. 2018. “Que Disent Les Sciences de 

l’éducation à Propos de l’apprentissage Du Code?” Revue de l’association EPI, no. 2015 
(May). https://www.epi.asso.fr/revue/articles/a1805b.htm.

Wing, Jeannette M. 2011. “Computational Thinking.” In IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and 

Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC), 33. IEEE.

RR N° 9379

S. Barnabé, L. Denet, M. Manrique, D. Menon, É. Pascual, M. Romero, T. Viéville 36

Contributions and acknowledgements

- Sabrina Barnabé designed the tabletop mechanism, constructed the tabletop hardware and
participated in the system conception, calibration and validation.
- Lola Denet developed the final French version of the scenario, designed and realized the user-
interface software of the storyline scenario.
- Mathieu Manrique created and realized the graphics of the user-interface software and co-
developed the French version of the scenario.
- Divya Menon is the instructional designer for this project who, at the origin of this project,
provided the pedagogic and didactic aspects of the scenario, and performed a state-of-the-art
review related to addressed issues. She has also done an editorial review of this paper.
- Éric Pascual designed the electronic hardware, realized the hardware drivers and advised the set-
up realization all along with the project.
- Margarida Romero is the educational science researcher at the origin of this project, providing the
theoretical ideas and framework, the pedagogical elements, and advising the didactic incomes, and
supervising Divya Menon work.
- Thierry Viéville is the informatics researcher at the origin of this project, contributed to the didactic
aspects of the setup in link with science outreach issues, realized the algorithmic software and took
coordination.
care

project

the

of

The present paper input has been provided by all co-authors, shaped by the two last authors, and
revised by the whole team.

The present realization has been funded by the Inria Science Outreach Project (Mission de
Médiation Scientifique Inria) https://pixees.fr/mediation-scientifique-inria and the Class´Code
project https://classcode.fr, within the scope of their support to research development in link with
their science popularization actions.

The present realization has been supported by the LINE laboratory and the PoBot maker space and
is now part of the Inria Mnemosyne AEx AIDE action https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne/aide and the
ARN CreaMaker project https://creamaker.wordpress.com.

Inria

 
 
 
 
RESEARCH CENTRE
BORDEAUX – SUD-OUEST

200 avenue de la Vieille Tour
33405 Talence Cedex

Publisher
Inria
Domaine de Voluceau - Rocquencourt
BP 105 - 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex
inria.fr

ISSN 0249-6399

