Understanding Intelligently Artificial Intelligence : a
citizens’ open formation
Frédéric Alexandre, Robert de Barretin, Jade Becker, Marie-Hélène Comte,

Martine Courbin-Coulaud, Sonia Cruchon, Aurelie Lagarrigue, Bastien Masse,

Sophie de Quatrebarbes, Julie Stein, et al.

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Robert de Barretin, Jade Becker, Marie-Hélène Comte, Martine Courbin-Coulaud,
et al.. Understanding Intelligently Artificial Intelligence : a citizens’ open formation. International
Workshop on Education in Artificial Intelligence K-12 (EduAI), Jul 2020, Ifrane, Morocco.
￿hal-
02889682￿

HAL Id: hal-02889682

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02889682

Submitted on 4 Jul 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Understanding Intelligently Artificial Intelligence : 
 a citizens' open formation. 

Submitted tor 

, if ok 10 pages paper before 10th july. 
 Topics : K-12 AI educational initiatives and projects, AI teaching concepts and materials, parental involvement in AI-literacy. 

2 pages abstract < 7th june

http://eduai.ist.tugraz.at

 using this 

format

: 

8
​, Robert de Barretin

7
​, Jade Becker

2
​, Aurélie Lagarrigue

4
​, Bastien Masse

5
​, Sophie de Quatrebarbes

2
2
​, Sonia
​, Martine Courbin
​, Marie-Hélène Comte
7
​, and
​, Claude Terosier

6
​, Julie Stein

https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne 

https://learninglab.inria.fr

​and 

, 
Science Outreach Department

​. 

1
Fréderic Alexandre
3
Cruchon
1
Thierry Viéville
1
​ Inria, Mnémosyne team, 
2
​ Inria, Learning Lab 
3
​ 4 minutes 34 
4
​ Université de Nantes 
5
​ S24B l’interactive 
6
​ La Ligue de l’enseignement 
7
​ Magic-Makers 
8
​ DataBingo 
mailto: 

https://data.bingo/ 
thierry.vieville@inria.fr 

https://www.4minutes34.com 

https://www.univ-nantes.fr 

https://www.s24b.com 

https://laligue.org 

https://www.magicmakers.fr 

Keywords

: Artificial intelligence for all, Computational thinking, Free reusable online resources, MOOC. 

1.

Context and Objectives 

Our whole society is and will be deeply impacted by digital science and this takes a new qualitative and
quantitative turn with what is named artificial intelligence (AI). We
must allow everyone to master, thus
understand how all this works. This means computational thinking discovery and machine learning initiation.
Directly inspired by the Finnish initiative to train 1% of its population on these subjects [1] and after our success
in providing a hybrid formation on computational thinking for teachers and citizens not familiar with computer
science [2] where more 45000 persons have been reached, yielding a satisfaction level higher than 90%, we
have built and now operate a citizen training in AI in the broad sense, intended to a large public beyond the
 [3]. 
ubiquitary citizen university in digital science and culture
school domain, with the goal of giving rise to an 
​

2.

Method and Production 

,
hybrid
​

performative and

attestation of attendance

We produced a
contaminating training: Freely accessible online training course with
; online exchange forum, to share and help each other, when training on
free of charge
these subjects; online and in real life hangouts to extend this sharing and serve local projects on these subjects,
all content items being also reusable to derive and build other ressources. Hybrid : Because online ressources are
designed to derive in situ activities. Performative : Because students are taught to be their own teacher, while
helping each other. Performative, in the sense that an adult benefits from this training and then in his family or
in his business, association, structure shares what he has discovered with his or her children or the seniors, or the
other way round. Part of the training exercises is to be able to transmit what has been learned. 

With respect to other offers in the field [1], the contents are less technical (e.g., machine learning programming
in Python is proposed only as an extension), but not only a verbal introduction, while effective activities,
including unplugged activities (i.e., without a computer using low-tech everyday tools), are proposed to really
understand how-it-works. We not only talk about AI, we make people manipulate. 

Contents allow us to gain a first understanding of what AI means and what it is not, understand the principles
of machine learning and the crucial role played by data, taking into account the societal issues of AI. Learners
are invited to question themself, beyond preconceived ideas, and really understand the ground of AI; perform
activities and manipulate AI programs to build their own vision; acquire a minimal scientific and technical
culture (concepts, history of humans and ideas). As an outcome they are able to discuss the subject, question
applications, choose some framework to contribute to the development (or not) of AI applications. 

 
 
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
 
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.

First results and Analysis 

After one month of activity [results will be updated in the final version], more than 10000 persons joined (35%
female, 64% male, 1% not binary) with about 300 persons done yet, more than 1000 persons enjoying at least a
part of this modular formation. They are mainly active (55% on activity, 15% retired, 11% students, 8% job
researcher), mostly with university level (78% at least bachelors in any field, 10% PhD), but rather beginners in
the field (57% full beginners, 40% intermediate non expert), working 10 to 20 hours in average (about 50% of
the persons spend from 2 up to 5 hours per week, during about 3 weeks, while 25% spend less and 25% more),
and above 90% of person having their expectation satisfied (40% fully satisfied). Detailed results [will be]
available as supplementary material. On the forum, more than 1500 persons have been or are active while more
than 3500 are reading the about 200 discussions, more than half being on the course contents (e.g., strong versus
weak AI, symbolic versus numeric methods, societal issues, …). More than 10 online hangouts of 30 to 200
persons have been already organized by one of the 70 partners of the Class´Code project [4], during this
covid-19 confinement. 

Qualitatively, beyond very nice and encouraging positive feedbacks, through the constant evaluation of the
course by the users, we are invited to take several improvements into account : (i) extend the existing formation
with more operational tutorials, (ii) manage some technical weakness because we integrate state of the art recent
external resources, some still to be consolidated, (iii) complete the existing contents to better help the learner
progression. And we will, since this is a long term open course (probably more than 2 years). A few persons did
not find what they expected, either because they are not interested in redoing activities with young person (on
any age ;)) to better understand or because they were looking for professional formation. 

On our side, we are really delighted to participate on these researcher-citizen exchanges and shares, with very
interesting questions, sometimes on crucial subjects, always moderated (no troll, yet ;)). We are less happy
about the fact we have mainly reached rather highly educated persons, while we target popularisation. When a
person joins, the content is always considered as accessible, and the hard point is to join. We hope that in real
life hangouts and also community approaches will help, and work on this aspect [5,6]. 

4.

Conclusion and Perspectives 

We are proposing a “maker” approach to AI popularization between technical formation allowing to use AI at
work, such as [1], and more superficial presentation of AI only in “words”. 

Acknowledgements
University Engineering and Technology
all 

. 
Class´Code partners

The

Digital Direction for Education of the French Ministry, the French

Digital

, Microsoft,

EducAzur

, La

,
Compagnie du Code

LINE laboratory

, and

References 

1. A free online introduction to artificial intelligence for non-experts, 

https://www.elementsofai.com

, last accessed 

2020/05/31 

2. Mariais, C., Roche, D., Farhi, L., Barnabé, S., Cruchon, S., de Quatrebarbes, S., Viéville, T. EIAH'19 Wokshop : 
Apprentissage de la pensée informatique de la maternelle à l’Université : retours d’expériences et passage à 
l’échelle, Paris, France (2019) 

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02145466v2 

3. Atlan, C., Archambault, J.P., Banus, O., Bardeau, F., Blandeau, A. et al.. Apprentissage de la pensée informatique 
: de la formation des enseignant·e·s à la formation de tou·te·s les citoyen·ne·s. EIAH'19 Wokshop - Apprentissage 
de la pensée informatique de la maternelle à l’Université : retours d’expériences et passage à l’échelle, Paris, 
France (2019) 
The Class´Code 

4.
5. Corieri, P., Romero, M., Massart, T., Goletti, O., Mens, K., et al.. Enjeux dans la création d'une communauté 

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02145480v1 

, last accessed 2020/05/31 

 online reusable formation 

https://classcode.fr/iai

https://classcode.fr

d'enseignants engagés dans l'apprentissage de l'informatique. Didapro 8 - DidaSTIC - Colloques francophones de 
didactique de l’informatique, Lille, France (2020) 

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02426274v1 

6. Romero, M., Lefèvre, S.-C., Viéville, T. When a Master of Sciences on EdTech becomes an International 

Community. ERCIM News, (2020) 

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02418510v1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
