Decision-making in a neural network model of the basal
ganglia
Charlotte Héricé, Radwa Khalil, Maria Moftah, Thomas Boraud, Martin

Guthrie, André Garenne

To cite this version:

Charlotte Héricé, Radwa Khalil, Maria Moftah, Thomas Boraud, Martin Guthrie, et al.. Decision-
making in a neural network model of the basal ganglia. Sixth International Symposium on Biology of
Decision Making (SBDM 2016), May 2016, Paris France. . ￿hal-01368504￿

HAL Id: hal-01368504

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01368504

Submitted on 19 Sep 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Decision-making in a neural network 
model of the basal ganglia

Charlotte HÉRICÉ 1, 2, 3, Radwa KHALIL 1, Marie MOFTAH 4 , 
Thomas BORAUD 1, 2, Martin GUTHRIE 1, 2 and André GARENNE 1, 2, 3

Contact: charlotte.herice@u-bordeaux.fr 
andre.garenne@u-bordeaux.fr

INTRODUCTION 

BEHAVIORAL TASK

Basal ganglia (BG) are known to host mechanisms of action selection and 
its adaptation to a changing environment. Their architecture consist of several 
parallel functional loops connecting back to distinct areas of cortex (motor, 
cognitive and limbic) and processing different modalities of decision making. 
The picture of parallel loops is complicated by partial convergence and 
divergence connections that implies that the various loops are interacting. 

We submit the model to a protocol2,3 for BG involvement in decision-making 
with monkeys in conditions of uncertainty. There are 4 different cue shapes, 
each with its own reward probability and 4 possible positions. 
At each trial : 
1. Random presentation of 2 cue shapes (at random positions) 
2. Choice made by the monkey and the model 
3. Reward given or not according to the reward probability of the shape 

A previous BG model1 was built of 
interacting bloc-diagram based on 
rate-models. It was able to learn 
optimized action selection during 
a probabilistic reward task. The 
aim of the present work is to reﬁne 
and extend these results to a cell-
synapse level through a bottom-
up approach. 

→ Probabilistic learning task 
→T h e m o n k e y a n d 
t h e 
model both have to learn to 
chose the optimum cue 
shape (the one with the best 
reward probability).

4 targets protocol
P(R) = 1 
P(R) = 0.67 
P(R) = 0.33 
P(R) = 0

2 targets protocol
P(R) = 0.75 
P(R) = 0.25

→ Highlighting of the structure-function relationship and circuitry emerging 
properties. 

→ Investigation of cell-scale mechanisms impact on the whole model 

capacities (learning and decision-making).

NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 

RESULTS 

Start of trial

Targets 
presentation

Go signal

On target

Back home

Reward

Delivery

Omission

Delivery

Omission

Time

72 possible 
conditions

Hold
1-1.5 s

Hold
1-1.5 s

Hold

Movement

Movement

0.5-1 s

Hold
0.8-1.2 s

 - Exploration: 

An expected emergent property of the network is a divergence in the cortical activations of 
cognitive and motor sub-populations. In the absence of learning the network is still able to make 
a decision. This is equivalent to decision-making during the exploration phase of reinforcement 
learning. 

A.

→ With the time course of the average 
ﬁring rate (A), we are able to see the 
evolution of motor and cognitive cortex 
for example. 
→ A decision is made when a difference in 
the activities more than 40 Hz is observed. 
→ The higher activity represents the 
choice

Cognitive decision

Motor decision

Time (ms)

)
z
H

(
e
t
a
R
g
n
i
r
i
F
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

)
z
H

(
e
t
a
R
g
n
i
r
i
F
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

- Exploitation:
A Good Choice (GC) is made when the optimal shape is selected and a Good Decision (GD) 
when the associated direction is selected too. Both are improved during a standard learning 
session (B). 

B.

)

%

(

e
t
a
r

s
s
e
c
c
u
S

D.

)
s
m

(

i

l

y
a
e
d
g
n
k
a
e
r
b
y
r
t
e
m
m
y
S

Good Choices 
Good Decisions 

C.

)

%

(

e
t
a
r

s
s
e
c
c
u
S

Before 
learning

After 
learning

Before 
learning

After 
learning

Trial

During training, the model learns to create a dynamic link between 
the cognitive and motor sensory component of a cue. This can be 
assessed by the learning curves proﬁle of the model (C). 

→ The average reward and GC rate gradually increase along the 
session (C). 
→ The optimum cue shape direction is preferentially selected (B). 
→ The movement onset delay is decreased by the learning (D).

Before 
learning

After 
learning

-

 Spiking neurons: Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neurons and 
voltage jump synapses. 

- Learning: adaptation of the cognitive corticostriatal 
projections strength modulated by a phasic dopamine 

release (≈ reward prediction error).

CONCLUSION 

We have presented here, for the ﬁrst time, a biophysically 
based, spiking neuron model of the BG that is able to perform 
2 levels action selection. This model is closely based on the 
known anatomy and physiology of the basal ganglia and 
demonstrates a reasonable mechanism of network level action 
selection. 
This cellular and synaptic level of description bridges the gap 
between top-down mesoscopic level of description1 and a 
bottom-up approach relying on emerging properties of neuronal 
networks dynamics. Our model is also able to predicts some 
important behavioral characteristics like localized lesion 
consequences on learning impairment and intrinsic dynamics, 

reversal learning and extinction protocol.

REFERENCES 
1 M. Guthrie et al. Interaction between cognitive and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision making: a 
computational study, 2013 J. NeuroPhysiology 
2 B. Pasquereau et al. Shaping of Motor Responses by Incentive Values through the Basal Ganglia, 2007 J. 
Neuroscience 
3 C. Piron et al. The GPi in goal-oriented and routine behaviors: resolving a long-standing paradox, 2015 Movement 

Disorders

INSTITUTES 
1 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, CNRS UMR 5293, 
Bordeaux, France 
2 University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France 
3 Team Mnemosyne INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Bordeaux, France 
4 Zoology Department, Faculty of Science of Alexandria University, 

Alexandria, Egypt 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
