The role of cognitive processes in creative problem
solving: a computational approach
Frédéric Alexandre, Chloé Mercier, Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry

Viéville

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Chloé Mercier, Axel Palaude, Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville. The role
of cognitive processes in creative problem solving: a computational approach. 7th annual meeting
of the Society for the Neuroscience of Creativity (SfNC 2022), May 2022, Virtual, United States.
￿hal-03659409￿

HAL Id: hal-03659409

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03659409

Submitted on 5 May 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

The role of cognitive processes in creative problem solving: 
a computational approach.

Frédéric Alexandre1, Chloé Mercier1, Axel Palaude1, Margarida Romero2, Thierry Viéville1,2
1. Inria, Mnemosyne Team, Bordeaux, France
2. LINE, Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France.

Context: a multi-disciplinary perspective 
on ill-defined learning activities

Creativity, a phenomenon whereby something new and valuable is formed by a subject in a given context, 
plays a critical role in specific phases of learning activities. Here, we aim at analyzing creativity in the precise 
context of ill-defined problem-solving tasks, as it can be experienced during learning activities. 

This study aims to contribute to a better understanding of creativity within ill-defined creative 
problem-solving (CPS) tasks, including complex problem solving, through a multi-disciplinary approach using 
computational and neuro-cognitive formalisms. This approach allows us to propose a multi-factor theoretical 
description of such cognitive human activities. Based on this, we aim to operationalize a computational 
framework of creative processes during CPS learning tasks. We focus on an ill-defined CPS task performed by 
a unique learner, while even in this case sociocultural perspectives have to be considered to model prior 
knowledge and situational awareness aspects..

Problem solving as a trajectory generation

Problem Space

Problem

A problem space consists of:
● a set of symbolic structures (the states of 

the space)

● a set of operators over the space.

A problem in a problem space consists of:
• a set of initial states
• a set of goal states
• a set of path constraints.

The problem is to find a path through the space that starts at any initial state, passes only along paths 
that satisfy the path constraints, and ends at any goal state.

Neural basis of creative problem solving

 2. Affiliation

A computational framework for knowledge representation

CONTROL NETWORK
Attention and cognitive 
control (PFC)

DEFAULT MODE NETWORK 
Spontaneous, mind 
wandering (IC, HPC)

evaluate appropriateness 
(convergent)

propose candidate ideas
(divergent)

SALIENCE NETWORK
Salience of sensory features 
(IC, ACC-PFC)

A general view of the broad functional 
organization discussed here, from (O’Reilly, 
2010) adapted to our purpose. The What 
stimulus-driven (S) semantic 
representation (S’) corresponds to the 
ventral posterior pathway, while the How 
stimulus (S) to response (R) mapping, i.e. 
perception to action, corresponds to the 
dorsal posterior pathway. 
In the anterior part of the brain, the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) organization is 
multidimensional as detailed in (Alexandre, 
2021), with a What - Why - Where - How 
goal-directed organization, a What 
concrete-abstract gradient regarding 
representation abstraction and a How 
concrete-abstract gradient regarding rule 
complexity. 
A step further, the lateral-medial axis 
corresponds to cold cognitive calculation 
versus hot emotional value representation.

3 main neural networks involved in creative 
processes:

-

-

-

the Default network corresponds to brain 
regions active during spontaneous thought 
and mind wandering. It includes the 
insular cortex (IC) and the hippocampus 
(HPC) and a primary function of this 
network is episodic memory retrieval.
the Control network includes the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and is activated for 
the control of attention.
the Salience network includes the insular 
cortex (IC), the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and 
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and 
monitors the salience of sensory features. 

(Beaty et al., 2016) has reported a major 
association between the default and control 
networks during creativity, where the default 
network proposes candidate ideas (divergent 
phase) and the control network stands for the 
evaluation of their appropriateness (convergent 
phase).

Figure adapted from (Lesage, 2016).

Symbolic concepts anchored on sensorimotor features…

A symbolic knowledge graph providing multiple layers of 
abstraction as well as anchoring into sensorimotor feature 
spaces, inspired by (McClelland, 2003), (Gärdenfors, 2004), 
(Wiggins, 2006), (Hommel, 2015) and (Olteteanu, 2020) 
among others.

The key point is that such concepts can also be considered 
as points in an abstract state space.

A concept may inherit features from another concept (in 
dotted lines, e.g., the Penguin “is-a” Bird thus inherits the 
features of a Bird) but also override some of them (in red 
lines, e.g., a Penguin can also swim but can not fly).

… allowing to define behavioral rules at a meta-level

Formalizing problem solving as a trajectory generation problem in an abstract state space. Here, the definition is extended 
to complex ill-defined problem solving and allows us to propose an operational specification of creativity in this context.

Creative problem solving, step by step

well-defined 
problems

Tower of Hanoï

1

2

3

General schema of creative problem-solving 
steps, adapted to our approach, from the 
componential model proposed by (Amabile 
1996). The central part corresponds to the 
creative process itself. 

 The notion of behavioral rule in order to formalize an action in a 
problem-solving task. A precondition is to be satisfied for the rule to 
be applicable. The precondition is defined as a region of the state 
space, the current state space estimation as another region and the 
rule is applicable if the latter is included in the former. The result of 
the action corresponds to a postcondition, defined as a region of the 
state space, and the next state space is included in this region.

References

Alexandre, F. (2020). Creativity explained by Computational Cognitive Neuroscience. ICCC’20 - 
International Conference on Computational Creativity.
Alexandre, F. (2021). A global framework for a systemic view of brain modeling. Brain Informatics.
Amabile, T. (1983). The Social Psychology of Creativity.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). Creative Cognition and Brain 
Network Dynamics. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
Dietrich, A. (2004). The cognitive neuroscience of creativity. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Newell, A., Simon H. (1972). Human Problem Solving.
Oltețeanu, A.-M. (2020). Cognition and the Creative Machine: Cognitive AI for Creative Problem 
Solving.
O’Reilly, R. C. (2010). The What and How of Prefrontal Cortical Organization. Trends in 
Neurosciences.
Romero, M., David, D., & Lille, B. (2019). CreaCube, a Playful Activity with Modular Robotics. In 
Games and Learning Alliance. 
Wiggins, G. A. (2006). Searching for computational creativity. New Generation Computing.

ill-defined 
problems

ambiguity 
level

initial state

CreaCube

initial state

goal state

“Build a vehicle composed of 4 items, 
moving autonomously from the black 
point to the red point” 

?

goal state

We hypothesize that solving such ill-defined problems requires creativity, in a sense of the 
competency to generate, select and implement ideas that are both 
i) novel (i.e., original, unexpected) and 
ii) appropriate (i.e., useful, adequate regarding task constraints), 
from the problem posing disambiguation to the problem solving enaction within a specific task 
and sociocultural context.

1

2

3

The preparation phase requires an interaction between the environment and the learner 
in creative ill-defined complex problem solving. We formalize this interaction in terms of 
bottom-up conceptualization, i.e., building an internal representation of the external 
situation to raise the problem issue, and top-down instantiation of the problem, i.e., 
setting a goal for the next step.

A geometric illustration of two idea generation mechanisms, allowed by the previous symbolic 
knowledge representation.
Left: Exploratory search in the sense of (Ritchie, 2012; G. A. Wiggins, 2006). 
Right: Reasoning by analogy. 

The distance between the current state and the goal state can be estimated using an 
edit distance between two semi-ordered hierarchical tuples (geodesic structure).

3

