Impact of the Konio pathway in the thalamocortical
visual system: a modeling study
Carlos Carvajal, Thierry Viéville, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Carlos Carvajal, Thierry Viéville, Frédéric Alexandre.
Impact of the Konio pathway in the thala-
mocortical visual system: a modeling study. Twenty Second Annual Computational Neuroscience
Meeting : CNS 2013, Jul 2013, Paris, France. 14 (Suppl 1), pp.P6, 2013. ￿hal-00842314￿

HAL Id: hal-00842314

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00842314

Submitted on 8 Jul 2013

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Carvajal et al. BMC Neuroscience 2013, 14(Suppl 1):P6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/14/S1/P6

P O S T E R P R E S E N T A T I O N

Open Access

Impact of the Konio pathway in the
thalamocortical visual system: a modeling study
Carlos Carvajal1,2,3\*, Thierry Viéville1, Frédéric Alexandre1,2

From Twenty Second Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting: CNS\*2013
Paris, France. 13-18 July 2013

Background
In the early visual system, regarding the detection of a
visual event, motion information is pre-processed in the
Magnocellular pathway, while it has been shown that the
Koniocellular pathway [1] also plays an important role,
providing a global analysis about such a kind of informa-
interplay
tion processing. However, the functional
between these two parallel pathways remains partially
understood. Previous works have attacked this question
by studying the signals produced by the corresponding
ganglion cells [1] and their elaboration at further steps
[2], rather than proposing to model the underlying
mechanisms at a mesoscopic level, i.e., focusing on the
functional aspects of such dual processing. Neurobiologi-
cal studies dedicated to the thalamocortical stage of the
early visual system provide knowledge on particular char-
acteristics of the system, namely: 1) the variety of cell
types in the retina [2], inducing different pathways, 2) the
variety of thalamocortical projections through focused vs
diffuse efferences to the cortex [3], from core vs matrix
(specific vs non-specific) thalamic nuclei, and 3) the vari-
ety of kinds of connectivity between thalamic, cortical
and collicular areas (i.e., feedforward, feedback, shortcuts,
driver and modulator information flows [4]).

Methods
To figure out the impact of these multi-scale characteris-
tics, we propose here a systemic approach at the struc-
ture level. To this end, we have developed a reduced bio-
inspired distributed asynchronous model of the primitive
mammal visual system, considering only motion event
detection. This computational model is fed with natural
image sequences, and is implemented as a large size

1Inria, Mnemosyne Team, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research Center, 33400
Talence, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

2.

distributed calculation [5] with thousands of computation
units per structure.

Results
Thanks to the dual analysis integrating local and larger
image cues, we test the system for the detection of spe-
cific dynamical patterns (which could be interpreted as,
e.g., threats or targets). Our simulations aim at showing
that these multi-scale interactions help improving the
speed and/or quality of such critical tasks, including tar-
get selection and tracking. We expect this approach to
propose an innovative answer to the interplay issues
quoted here, generalizable to other visuo-motor func-
tions. This also provides a platform that could be used
as a testbed for new hypotheses. Further information
flows to be included could correspond to the Parvocel-
lular pathway (and its related functions). Other struc-
tures such as the pulvinar, or higher cortical areas,
would also allow us to explore even more developed
mechanisms and behaviors [3,6].

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Nicolas Rougier for his help with DANA [5]
in the early development stages. This work is supported by the ANR/
CONICYT KEOpS project, the Lorraine Region and the CORTINA associated
team.

Author details
1Inria, Mnemosyne Team, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research Center, 33400
Talence, France. 2LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies
Neurodégénératives, 33000 Bordeaux, France. 3Université de Lorraine, LORIA
UMR 7503, 54600 Villers-lès-Nancy, France.

Published: 8 July 2013

References
1.

Hendry SH, Reid RC: The koniocellular pathway in primate vision. Annu
Rev Neurosci 2000, 23:127-153.
Nassi JJ, Callaway EM: Parallel processing strategies of the primate visual
system. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009, 10(5):360-372.

© 2013 Carvajal et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Carvajal et al. BMC Neuroscience 2013, 14(Suppl 1):P6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/14/S1/P6

Page 2 of 2

3.

4.

5.

6.

Jones EG: The thalamic matrix and thalamocortical synchrony. Trends
Neurosci 2001, 24(10):595-601.
Sherman SM, Guillery RW: The role of the thalamus in the flow of
information to the cortex. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2002,
357(1428):1695-1708.
Fix J, Rougier N: DANA: Distributed numerical and adaptive modelling
framework. Network 2012, 23(4):237-253.
Girard B, Berthoz A: From brainstem to cortex: computational models of
saccade generation circuitry. Prog Neurobiol 2005, 77(4):215-251.

doi:10.1186/1471-2202-14-S1-P6
Cite this article as: Carvajal et al.: Impact of the Konio pathway in the
thalamocortical visual system: a modeling study. BMC Neuroscience 2013
14(Suppl 1):P6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

