Pattern Separation in the Hippocampus: Distinct
Circuits under Different Conditions
Randa Kassab, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Randa Kassab, Frédéric Alexandre. Pattern Separation in the Hippocampus: Distinct Circuits under
￿10.1007/s00429-
Different Conditions. Brain Structure and Function, 2018, 223 (6), pp.2785-2808.
018-1659-4￿. ￿hal-01931720￿

HAL Id: hal-01931720

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01931720

Submitted on 22 Nov 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Pattern Separation in the Hippocampus: Distinct Circuits under Different ConditionsABSTRACT Pattern separation is a fundamental hippocampal process thought to be critical for distinguishing similar episodic memories,and has long been recognized as a natural function of the dentate gyrus (DG) supporting autoassociative learning in CA3.Understanding how neural circuits within the DG-CA3 network mediate this process has received much interest, yet theexact mechanisms behind remain elusive. Here we argue for the case that sparse coding is necessary but not sufficient toensure efficient separation and, alternatively, propose a possible interaction of distinct circuits which, nevertheless, act insynergy to produce a unitary function of pattern separation. The proposed circuits involve different functional granule-cellpopulations, a primary population mediates sparsification and provides recurrent excitation to the other populations whichare related to additional pattern separation mechanisms with higher degrees of robustness against interference in CA3. Avariety of top-down and bottom-up factors, such as motivation, emotion, and pattern similarity, controls the selection ofcircuitry depending on circumstances. According to this framework, a computational model is implemented and testedagainst model variants in a series of numerical simulations and biological experiments. The results demonstrate that themodel combines fast learning, robust pattern separation and high storage capacity. It also accounts for the controversyaround the involvement of the DG during memory recall, explains other puzzling findings, and makes predictions that caninform future investigations. KEY WORDScomputational model; dentate gyrus; episodic memory; hippocampus; pattern separationINTRODUCTIONMuch of what we actually remember is related to unique, personally experienced events, which are known as episodicmemories (Tulving, 1972). Despite a high degree of similarity between episodic memories, e.g. common, familiar people,places or similar routines, we are usually able to remember distinctive characteristics of closely related but distinct episodes.This ability critically depends on the hippocampus (Scoville and Milner, 1957; Eichenbaum, 2004; Treves et al., 2008;Rolls, 2013), and is thought to be mediated by a process of pattern separation, by which afferent inputs from the entorhinalcortex (EC) are transformed into distinct, relatively non-overlapping representations (Yassa and Stark, 2011). Early studiesof hippocampal CA3-like recurrent networks have clearly demonstrated the importance of sparsely encoded input patternsfor increasing storage capacity and for preventing interference from similar memories (Amari, 1989; Knoblauch et al.,2010). It has long been conjectured, therefore, that hippocampal pattern separation might originate upstream from CA3,more precisely, in the DG (McNaughton and Nadel, 1990; Treves and Rolls, 1994; Treves et al., 2008). Solid research overthe ensuing years has substantiated the putative role of the DG in pattern separation, with evidence fromelectrophysiological, lesion and immediate-early-gene imaging studies in rodents (Gilbert et al., 2001; Lee and Kesner,2004; McHugh et al., 2007; Leutgeb et al., 2007; Hunsaker et al., 2008; Goodrich-Hunsaker et al., 2008) and fromfunctional magnetic resonance imaging studies in humans (Bakker et al., 2008; Berron et al., 2016). The candidatemechanisms of how pattern separation is performed in the DG and how the effect of separation is maintained downstream inCA3, however, remain a matter of debate.SparsificationThe granule cells of the DG have unusually low firing rates and largely outnumber both their presynaptic EC projectioncells and their postsynaptic CA3 pyramidal cells (In each rat hemisphere, EC projections from ~110,000 EC layer II cellsdiverge onto ~1.2 million granule cells whose axons converges on ~250,000 CA3 pyramidal cells (West et al., 1991; Witter,2010), with only 1-2% of granule cells exhibiting activity (Chawla et al., 2005)). Based on these unique properties, granulecells are suggested to sparsely recode EC inputs such that only a minority of the granule cell population can be active,allowing for their neural representations in the DG to be orthogonalized or at least almost orthogonalized (Chawla et al.,2005; Leutgeb et al., 2007; Deng et al., 2013). The direct link between sparseness and pattern separation was originallydescribed by David Marr in his earlier studies of the cerebellum (Marr, 1969), and subsequently inspired hippocampaltheories (Marr, 1971; McNaughton and Nadel, 1990; O’Reilly and McClelland, 1994).2Most Marr-like models assume, either explicitly or implicitly, an inhibitory control over the activity of granule cells throughactivation of local interneurons (Treves and Rolls, 1994; Myers and Scharfman, 2009; Aimone et al., 2009). The central ideais that EC inputs excite granule cells which, in turn, excite interneurons that inhibit other granule cells, making the mostexcited granule cells compete with the less excited ones. The sparseness of DG neural codes is inversely related to theproportion of granule cells that survive inhibition (O’Reilly and McClelland, 1994). Some authors have further suggestedthat the plasticity observed at the perforant path-granule cell synapses (Bliss and Lomo, 1973) could help with this type ofrecoding through statistical learning (Treves and Rolls, 1994; Rolls, 2013). Such plasticity-mediated computations havelargely been developed in competitive learning theories (Rolls and Treves, 1998) and proved very efficient in a wide rangeof incremental learning paradigms (O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001; Gluck et al., 2003).In contrast, episodic learning challenges classical competitive learning theories because episodes occur only once and,therefore, cannot be learned through interleaved repetitions; their learning should be fast, often even in only single trial(Morris, 2001; Moser and Moser, 2003). This is a hard learning problem which has long constrained episodic memorymodels to relatively simple mechanisms of sparsification (McNaughton and Nadel, 1990; Weisz and Argibay, 2009; Myersand Scharfman, 2009, 2011). Such fast “one-shot” mechanisms could decrease, but not necessarily eliminate, inputsimilarity; extant overlap among output representations is most likely to increase as a function of input similarity andnumber of stored representations (Weisz and Argibay, 2009; Myers and Scharfman, 2011). This does not necessarilydiscount these mechanisms, but might suggest that a rapid process of sparsification is necessary but not sufficient to ensureefficient storage and recall. If this is the case, then the intriguing question is, “what additional computations does the DGexecute to ensure efficient separation even in one single trial?”Other Potential MechanismsProcessing routes within the DG are complex and its glutamatergic cell populations are heterogeneous, at least, in two basicaspects (Fig. 1). First, new granule cells are continuously generated throughout adulthood, and as they mature, newborncells display unique physiological properties which distinguish them from older adult-born cells and cells born early duringdevelopment (Ge et al., 2007; Dieni et al., 2013). Second, mossy cells, which are located exclusively in the hilus under thegranule cell layer, form a distinct glutamatergic cell population in the DG, although with much less abundance than granulecells (~50,000 mossy cells in one hemisphere of the rat hippocampus (West et al., 1991)). Like granule cells, mossy cellsrarely show mutual connections, but they form rich connectivity with other cell types in the DG (Acsàdy et al., 1998;Buckmaster et al., 1996; Larimer and Strowbridge, 2008). In particular, granule cell axons, the mossy fibers, innervatemossy cells and GABAergic neurons, before reaching CA3. In turn, mossy cells primarily innervate distant ipsilateral andcontralateral granule cells, but they also synapse onto different types of local interneurons that inhibit granule cells(Scharfman, 2016). This pattern of connectivity creates multiple positive and negative feedback loops in the DG, whichmakes it difficult to reveal the ultimate effect of mossy cells on the activation of granule cells (Scharfman, 2016). Thecomplexity of addressing this issue is further increased by the fact that hilar cells receive a feedback projection from CA3(Ishizuka et al., 1990; Li et al., 1994; Scharfman, 2007), and different neuromodulatory inputs (Amaral et al., 2007), whichmay bias their engagement under different conditions.Plastic changes have been reported in both granule cell-mossy cell and mossy cell-granule cell synapses (Lysetskiy et al.,2005; Hetherington et al., 1994). This plasticity along with the pattern of connectivity described above provide initialsupport for the granule cell-mossy cell-granule cell circuit as a potential substrate for a second level of informationprocessing in the DG. In line with this view, a number of studies have explored the functional significance of hilar circuitry(Buckmaster and Schwartzkroin, 1994; Buckmaster et al., 1996; Lisman, 1999) of which some are suggestive of a role inpattern separation (Myers and Scharfman, 2009; Aimone et al., 2009; Jinde et al., 2012; Senzai and Buzsáki, 2017). In avery interesting model, for instance, Myers and Scharfman (2009) proposed that hilar cells might bias competition betweengranule cells, providing a mechanism to regulate pattern separation in the DG. The model exhibited efficient patternseparation in the DG, but when extended later to include a CA3 network that is small relative to the DG, the model showedpoor pattern separation evidenced by very low storage capacity in CA3 (Myers and Scharfman, 2011).Influential theoretical models posit that pattern separation may be facilitated in CA3 by the strong and relatively focusedaspects of mossy fibers which relay sparse patterns of activity from the DG (O’Reilly and McClelland, 1994; Treves andRolls, 1994). These characteristics are presumed to enable efficient separation of CA3 patterns without the need for plasticchanges at mossy fiber-CA3 synapses. Such a solution would be especially valuable for episodic learning, but otherelements appear to be missing from this picture. Although the convergent nature of mossy fibers potentially reduces the3effect of separation achieved in the DG (Myers and Scharfman, 2011), they appear to elicit at the same time strongrecruitment of CA3 interneurons (Acsàdy et al., 1998), which may be key players in CA3 pattern separation (Ruediger etal., 2011). In their model, Myers and Scharfman (2011) also showed that the activation of inhibitory feedback connectionsfrom CA3 to DG granule cells improves both pattern separation and storage capacity in CA3. Nonetheless, empirical dataare lacking in the precise nature of CA3 backprojection and its potential contribution to pattern separation.Relatively much more attention has been paid to the possibility that adult-born granule cells might support patternseparation under conditions of presumably high level of interference (Clelland et al., 2009; Nakashiba et al., 2012).Immature granule cells, which exhibit a transient period of increased excitability and synaptic plasticity (Ge et al., 2007),are widely believed to function differently from their mature counterparts. A potent idea is that immature neurons may bepreferentially recruited to encode new events, and when becoming mature, they preferentially respond to those events thatthey experienced during their development (Wiskott et al., 2006; Kee et al., 2007; Aimone et al., 2009); other studies takethis idea to the extreme that mature granule cells are functionally retired (Alme et al., 2010). This view contrasts withsubsequent experiments suggesting that young and mature granule cells are equally likely to be recruited in memoryprocesses, see (Lopez-Rojas and Kreutz, 2016) for a review. A Synergistic View of Pattern Separation What is clear from the above considerations is that DG intrinsic neurocircuits might underlie additional mechanisms whichgo beyond simple sparsification through the most abundant granule cells. In actual fact, granule cells themselves are nothomogeneous and their activity is controlled by recurrent excitatory and inhibitory circuits which might have profoundeffects on the functional responsiveness of these cells. While attempts have been made to construct models that include allor most of these aspects, DG pattern separation is discussed in these models as a global function supported by a single, evenif sophisticated, circuitry. Instead, we develop in the present work the idea that hippocampal pattern separation involvesdistinct, but highly intertwined, circuits underlying different mechanisms of decorrelation with different degrees ofrobustness against interference. In our framework, new patterns are either made sparser or completely orthogonalizeddepending on specific factors, such as pattern similarity, emotion and mood states. Sparsification is rapidly achievedthrough a large population of granule cells with strong excitatory drive onto CA3 pyramidal cells. In some cases, convergentinputs from the DG to CA3 are accompanied by feedforward inhibition in order to counteract potential interference in CA3.In other extreme cases, a functionally distinct population of granule cells forms a second-level representation of a largerpopulation of granule cells and provides the basis for a complete orthogonalization in CA3. Here we present a unifyingcomputational framework which shows how known details of the DG-CA3 circuitry might support these pattern separationmechanisms and demonstrates their relevance for rapid yet accurate encoding and retrieval of information from one-timeexperiences.A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF THE DG-CA3 NETWORKGeneralitiesThe purpose of the model is to provide a computational framework for identifying key pathways in the DG-CA3 circuitrythat are likely to be involved in its putative function of pattern separation, and for explaining how the neural responses differunder specific conditions. The architecture of the present model is derived from known anatomical and physiologicalcharacteristics of the intrinsic circuitry of the DG and its connectivity with CA3 (Fig. 1 and 2). In particular, we demonstratethrough the model how a simple "sparsification" process through the most abundant granule cells would act in concert withadditional circuits in the DG-CA3 network to further boost the effect of pattern separation in CA3. We also explore throughthe model a potential role for the hilus as a locus where signals from extra- and intrahippocampal structures are gatheredtogether to harness these different circuits, allowing for different pattern separation mechanisms to be recruited underdifferent conditions. In actual cases, a variety of top-down and bottom-up factors may affect the level of load on patternseparation; input similarity (how similar an input pattern is to already established memories) is among the most prominentand highly studied (e.g., Gilbert et al. (2001); Clelland et al. (2009)). Here we mostly focus on this factor to exemplify thegeneral principle of the model, other factors will be discussed further later in the relevant sections.We remark that the basic architecture of the present model incorporates previous key assumptions regarding the functionalprinciples of the DG-CA3 circuitry (e.g., Marr (1971); McNaughton and Nadel (1990); O’Reilly and McClelland (1994);Treves and Rolls (1994); Hasselmo et al. (1996); Rolls (2013)), including notably that: 1) The CA3 network acts as anautoassociative memory with dense recurrent collaterals which is capable of storing and subsequently retrieving memory4traces. 2) The DG creates a sparse coding of EC inputs and drives CA3 neural activity during storage to construct newattractors representing novel inputs. 3) The direct EC-CA3 perforant pathway provides CA3 with retrieval cues, while theindirect disynaptic input from EC to CA3 via the DG is not directly involved during recall. 4) Novelty of EC inputs inducescircuit dynamics that favor learning over recall, through cholinergic and GABAergic projections from the basal forebrain.These basic assumptions lead to a standard model which mirrors fundamental properties of the anatomical and functionalcorrespondences of the DG-CA3 circuitry. Our model means to advance this view by considering different populations ofgranule cells with different patterns of connectivity with CA3 cells. The model is described next with an emphasis on thespecific aspects that diverge from single-population models and the ways in which they adjust the functional and dynamicalassumptions stated above. Additional implementation details are provided in the appendix.Network Structure and ConnectivityThe architecture of the model is consistent with the known anatomy of the hippocampus (Fig. 1), and is shownschematically in Fig. 2. The model includes networks for the DG and CA3 with both receiving common inputs from the EC.A core assumption of the model is that DG granule cells form functionally heterogeneous neuronal populations that differ intheir effects on CA3 pyramidal cells. From this perspective, the model defines two granule-cell populations in the DGnetwork: a large population of granule cells, PPGC (Perforant Path-driven Granule Cells), which are driven by inputs fromthe EC, and a smaller population of granule cells, HGC (Hilar-driven Granule Cells), which are solely driven by their inputsfrom hilar mossy cells, not by EC inputs. This assumption can be supported by the fact that the terminal zones of these twoafferent inputs are spatially segregated on the dendrites of granule cells (Amaral et al., 2007; Witter, 2010). The perforantpath fibers from the EC terminate in the outer two-thirds of the molecular layer of the DG, while the axons of mossy cellsterminate in the inner third of the molecular layer. Also a subtype of GABAergic neurons in the DG (MOPP and HIPP) haveaxons restricted to the terminal zone of the perforant path (Amaral et al., 2007; Freund and Buzsáki, 1996). Therefore, itseems reasonable to assume that a population of granule cells may be subject to a relatively strong dendritic inhibitioncoaligned with EC inputs, preventing dendritic integration of EC excitation and rendering this population exclusivelyresponsive to excitation from mossy cells. It also seems likely that such specificity may arise via an activity-dependentlearning process during maturation of newborn neurons in the DG. We elaborate on these and other possibilities later in thediscussion.The model assumes 200 cells in the EC, 1000 PPGC and 120 HGC in the DG, and 120 MC (mossy cells) in the hilus of theDG. The cell numbers are scaled down by approximately 1000 the size of the rat hippocampus (West et al., 1991; Witter,2010); a scale that is usually used in hippocampal models, e.g. (Myers and Scharfman, 2011), to maintain computationaltractability while ensuring the significance of simulation results. The EC-DG connectivity is sparse in the substrate; it isestimated that each granule cell receives from a random 2-3% of the EC cells, and that 10% of these inputs need to be activeto discharge the cell (McNaughton91, Witter, 2010). Because our relatively small-scale model does not allow to strictlyadhere to these estimates, we set the density of EC-DG projection to 25%, meaning that each PPGC/HGC receives inputfrom a random determined 25% of the EC cells. The level of tonic inhibition has been fixed such that a PPGC can only firein response to activation of at least 10% of its EC afferents. Plasticity at the EC-GC synapses is not considered in thepresent model; all synapses have static random weights but the influence of EC inputs onto HGC is suppressed by a localinterneuron which receives direct input from all EC cells. The model organizes both PPGC and HGC into a series of 10equally-sized non-overlapping clusters, each containing 100 PPGC and 12 HGC; such clusters, as proposed in (Myers andScharfman, 2009), can be regarded as an emerging aspect of the lamellar organization of mossy fiber-CA3 projectionswhich run transversely into a series of very narrow septotemporal segments of the hippocampus (Andersen et al., 1971;Amaral et al., 2007). Sparsification is implemented through a simple version of a lateral inhibitory winner-take-all (WTA)competition in which all but the most strongly-activated PPGC within each cluster are silenced. PPGC have a fullyconnected projection to MC and this projection is endowed with Hebbian plasticity. MC compete in a WTA fashion thatallows at most one MC to be activated at any one time, and project onto HGC in one-to-one relationships. This is asimplification of the one-to-many projection of mossy cells that excite granule cells (Buckmaster et al., 1996), but does notimpact the functional principle of the model; a HGC can be thought of as a unit representing a small number of granulecells. The synaptic weights between MC and HGC are constant and set so that a sufficiently excited MC can automaticallyevoke a postsynaptic response in HGC. Such a potent excitation from mossy cells onto granule cells has been recorded in invitro slices, especially under conditions of disinhibition (Scharfman, 1995; Jackson and Scharfman, 1996). It has also beenreported that plasticity of the dentate recurrent excitation network facilitates mossy cell excitatory actions in vivo(Kleschevnikov and Routtenberg, 2003). 5In CA3, the model contains large and small populations of CA3 pyramidal cells, PPCA3 and HCA3, respectively. Thisdistinction is based on anatomical and neurophysiological findings that CA3 can be divided into subregions located atdifferent transverse positions, CA3a, b, and c, with apparent differences in their connectivity (Ishizuka et al., 1990; Li et al.,1994; Scharfman, 2007). No data exist regarding the relative number of cells in these CA3 regions but, in the model, as willbecome clear shortly, the number of HCA3 is limited by the relatively small number of mossy cells, and set to 50 by default,while the number of PPCA3 has been set to 300. Like DG granule cells, both PPCA3 and HCA3 are each equally dividedinto 10 clusters, each containing 30 PPCA3 and 5 HCA3. Only PPCA3 receive projections from PPGC through sparse,lamellar and nonplastic connections; each PPGC in a given cluster targets a PPCA3 within the corresponding cluster in CA3and, on average, each PPCA3 is linked to three or four PPGC. The direct EC input only goes to PPCA3; each PPCA3receives from a random 25% of the EC cells. PPCA3 are interconnected by recurrent connections in a nonlamellar fashion;each PPCA3 receives from a random 50% PPCA3 sampled from the entire population. The density of this projection hasbeen chosen twice higher than the density of EC-PPCA3 afferents to accommodate the fact that collateral synapses providethe largest number of synapses on the dendrites of CA3 pyramidal cells (Witter, 2010). It has also been reported that such ahigh density of recurrent collaterals can be estimated in CA3a but gradually decreases to near zero in CA3c (de Almeida etal., 2007). Both EC-PPCA3 and PPCA3 recurrent projections are associatively modifiable by Hebbian learning. The backprojection from PPCA3 to MC integrates the global level of activation in PPCA3 and triggers the recruitment ofMC under specific conditions. We hypothesize that MC are divided into two subpopulations, MCl and MCh, with low- andhigh-activation thresholds, θl and θh, in response to PPCA3 cells. Both MCl and MCh behave as a WTA network and MChexert an inhibitory control masking MCl activity when they fire simultaneously. The only available evidence in support ofsuch a dichotomy in mossy cell responsiveness comes from empirical studies showing that a subset of mossy cells have alow threshold to perforant path stimulation in hippocampal slices, and predicting that this subset may correspond to thesmall subset of mossy cells that appear to be spontaneously active in vivo (Scharfman, 1991, Duffy et al., 2013). Based onthese data, it stands to reason that such behavior might result from differential innervation of local hilar interneurons byCA3 backprojection, making one of two subpopulations of mossy cells (MCl) more easily activated by CA3 than is the othersubpopulation (MCh). Obviously, further testing needs to be done to confront our hypothesis (i.e., to determine which inputscould facilitate the activity of mossy cells and whether CA3 inputs could trigger a similar effect on mossy cells). In the model, the two groups of mossy cells, MCl and MCh, do not differ in their connectivity to HGC, but HGC themselvesdo differ with respect to their connectivity to CA3. HGC that are driven by MCl exert a feedforward inhibition on PPCA3via Hebbian modifiable inhibitory synapses; this inhibition occurs on the distal dendrites of PPCA3 and thereby has scant orno effect on their activation by mossy fiber input. HGC that are driven by MCh make one-to-one excitatory synapses onHCA3 with constant synaptic weights (for this reason the number of MCh is set equal to the number of HCA3, i.e. 50), andHCA3, in turn, mediate a global inhibition on all PPCA3. This connectivity is obviously a simplification of mossy fiberprojections to both CA3 pyramidal cells and interneurons (Acsàdy et al., 1998), meant to more clearly delineate the specificfunctional contributions of HGC. For instance, the global inhibition from HCA3 onto PPCA3 can be replaced or fostered bydirect inhibition from HGC that are driven by MCh onto PPCA3 without affecting the model’s fundamentals.Functional DynamicsThe model has two modes of operation: a “storage mode” which is prioritized when inputs from the EC are novel, and a“recall mode” in which the model settles otherwise. Support for these functional modes derives from an elegant series ofstudies by Hasselmo and colleagues (see, e.g., Hasselmo et al. (1996)) linking cholinergic and GABAergic modulatoryeffects to circuit dynamics in the hippocampus. Increases in hippocampal acetylcholine release, which are correlated withnovelty detection (Aloisi et al., 1997), have been shown to suppress transmission at intrinsic synapses more thantransmission at extrinsic inputs from the EC; specifically, suppressing CA3 recurrent inputs would be relevant to the storageof novel inputs without interference from previously stored memories. This idea has been further elaborated by the proposalof hippocampal theta rhythm, which is modulated by cholinergic and GABAergic inputs from the medial septum, as amechanism for rapid transitions between encoding and recall dynamics (Hasselmo et al., 2002).It is widely held that the hippocampus generates its own novelty signal and uses it to incite learning dynamics through theseptohippocampal loop (Hasselmo et al., 1996). It is difficult, as yet, to decode with certainty the locus of novelty detectionin the hippocampus; both CA3 and CA1 are compelling candidates (Lee, 2005; Vago and Kesner, 2008): a weak recall inCA3 may reflect novelty, but also CA1 may serve as a basis for mismatch comparison of converging inputs from the ECand CA3. With both computations the hippocampus would be able to learn new inputs that differ from previously stored6memories, but would be less obviously able to deal with situations where familiar, but unexpected inputs need to be learnedas separate from similar past memories (e.g., as needed for the distinction between similar contexts in fear conditioningparadigms (Nakashiba et al., 2012)).Within our framework, we consider that the shift from recall to learning dynamics is not solely determined by the similaritybetween incoming and existing information, but also by other signals from extra-hippocampal structures attributingbehaviorally significant values to environmental states, generally considered as emotional, motivational, perceptual orattentional signals. The current instance of the model incorporates this consideration in simple ways: a switch to storagemode is forced either by an external signal regardless of input similarity or by a matching process that depends on anexternally-controlled threshold, υm, for deciding whether a match or a mismatch should be considered between CA3 recallactivity and previously stored memory traces.Instead of using recall activity in CA3 as a signal to shift between learning and recall modes, our model uses it – along withother emotional/motivational modulatory signals – at the early stage of learning to drive circuit dynamics during the storageof novel inputs. Specifically, CA3 activity is taken as a quantitative indicator of the potential of the newly to-be-storedinformation to interfere with previously stored memories; the potential risk of interference is formulated as a function of thesummed activity of the whole population of PPCA3, Σ. Depending on the strength of this signal (Σ), three scenarios arepossible in the model:Sparsification If no, or weak, activity is elicited in PPCA3 during recall (Σ ≤ θl), MC remain silent and encoding occurs inthe sparsification circuit. Input from the EC provides excitatory drive to PPGC which produce by their competitiveinteractions sparse outputs and via their mossy fibers force a new representation on PPCA3 to be stored in the network;storage takes place through Hebbian associative plasticity at EC-PPCA3 and PPCA3-PPCA3 synapses. During encoding,synaptic transmission is suppressed at both the perforant path and recurrent inputs to PPCA3 to avoid interference fromretrieval of existing memories. It is possible, however, to obviate the need for this suppression at the modifiable synapses aslong as the threshold, θl, is low enough to ensure interference-free learning in PPCA3. During recall, synaptic transmissionis selectively suppressed at PPGC mossy fiber synapses allowing the other two inputs to dominate the drive of PPCA3 andto support immediate retrieval of the stored patterns. Inhibition A limited scope for interference can be detected if the level of activity elicited in PPCA3 by an EC input duringrecall is higher than normal but not high enough for signaling a need for absolute orthogonalization (θl < Σ ≤ θh). In this caselearning has two phases. In the first phase, the network maintains recall dynamics and the feedback signal from CA3activates a MCl in the hilus. This activation causes Hebbian learning to occur at PPGC-MC heteroassociative synapses, andconcomitantly, the activated MCl undergoes a state of saturation to ensure that the same mossy cell will not be recruitedmore than once by CA3. In the second phase, the network makes a complete switch to learning dynamics and PPGC inputsthrough mossy fibers to PPCA3 and to MC dominate the activity in the network. Both EC-PPCA3 and PPCA3-PPCA3synapses undergo Hebbian plasticity to store the representation set up by PPGC mossy fibers in PPCA3. At the same time,PPGC provide MCl that responded to CA3 backprojection during the first phase with a strong drive leading to the activationof the corresponding HGC and its inhibitory action on PPCA3. The co-occurrence of postsynaptic firing in PPCA3 triggerssynaptic depression at the inhibitory synapses made onto active PPCA3. This implies that only silent PPCA3 cells remainunder the inhibitory control imposed by HGC on PPCA3, ensuring that the activity elicited in PPCA3 will be suppressedduring the retrieval of the stored memory.It is now evident that mossy fibers have unique morphological and physiological properties accounting for differentialcontrol of synaptic plasticity and transmission along the same axon, depending on its postsynaptic targets (Acsády et al.,1998; McBain, 2008). Little is known, however, about the functional implications of these specialized terminals for memoryencoding and retrieval. In our model, we assume that mossy fibers that target MC and CA3 interneurons are active duringrecall while PPGC mossy fibers onto PPCA3 are selectively suppressed. This enables the DG to work in tandem with CA3,with a net inhibitory action on PPCA3, leading to reasonably accurate recall of the neural representation of a memory thathas been encoded throughout the inhibition circuit.Orthogonalization When the feedback signal from CA3 to MC is turned up very high (Σ > θh), it is primarily because ahigh degree of similarity exists between the current input and, at least, one of the previously stored inputs. Storing thecurrent input in the PPCA3 network – even if represented by a strictly separate subpopulation of PPCA3 cells – is mostlikely to retroactively interfere with the retrieval of those other memories due to the associative plasticity at EC-PPCA37synapses. There should be, then, some additional mechanism(s) to keep earlier learning from being disturbed by storing ofnew inputs.In the present model, we suggest that the hippocampus might invoke additional pathways to encode and retrieve EC inputsthat present a high potential for interference. The network dynamics are quite similar to what we described above for theinhibition circuit. When CA3 sends back a sufficiently strong signal to the hilus, a MCh responds to this signal and learningtakes place at PPGC-MC synapses. Synaptic transmission at mossy fiber synapses is then promoted and causes MCh tobecome more active under intensive excitatory drive from PPGC. The corresponding HGC and HCA3 become activated inturn, while all PPCA3 fall silent under the powerful inhibitory action of HCA3 on PPCA3 during learning (and also duringrecall).This circuit leads to a complete orthogonal representation for the current input which is spatially separate from other similarmemories stored in the PPCA3 network. The direct perforant path is not responsible for the retrieval of the orthogonalizedrepresentation; instead, the indirect perforant input via the DG becomes directly involved in recall. Unlike PPGC mossyfibers onto PPCA3, synaptic transmission through mossy fiber inputs to HCA3 is enabled during both learning and recall.The argument stated above regarding the target-cell-dependent transmission at mossy fibre-CA3 synapses would still applyhere based on the anatomical and neurophysiological heterogeneity of CA3 subregions (CA3a, b, and c).TESTING THE MODELA series of numerical experiments were conducted to examine quantitative issues that are essential to refine the theoreticalperspective of the model. The ability of the model to perform pattern separation has been analyzed assuming varying sizedsets of input patterns with different degrees of correlation. The inputs were modeled as vectors of 200 EC cells with 10%activity (20 cells out of 200 are active (1) and the rest are silent (0)). The two working modes of learning and recall wereseparated by an external signal to ensure storage of all input patterns regardless of their similarity with each other. Themodel was trained to store, in a single pass, input patterns and, subsequently, tested for its ability to retrieve these patterns.We recorded the patterns of activity of DG and CA3 cells to quantify their individual contributions during storage and recallphases. Pattern separation was assessed by the extent to which the average similarity among the DG/CA3 output patterns isless than the average similarity among the EC input patterns. The quality of retrieval, which can be regarded as an indirectmeasure of the quality of pattern separation, was evaluated by computing the average similarity between the stored andrecalled patterns. The normalized dot product, which calculates the cosine of the angle between two vectors, was used as ameasure of the similarity between two activity patterns. This means that the more similar the two patterns, the closer thenormalized dot product is to 1; whereas, in contrast, the less similar they are, the closer the normalized dot product is to 0.We compared the model, hereafter referred to as the S-I-O model, with three reduced alternatives. In the first, the basicmodel (S), only the basic circuitry of sparsification is included, similar to standard models of the hippocampus. The secondand the third are models with either the neural circuitry of inhibition (S-I) or orthogonalization (S-O) included. Allexperiments were performed with the dual thresholding function being implemented in the model. The network parameterswere set at default, except when investigating the relative contributions of the different circuits by varying MC firingthresholds. Exploring the effects of different MC firing thresholds was intended to simulate the modulatory influence thatemotional/motivational states might exert on memory discrimination. For each experiment, 10 simulations were run withrandom initializations of the network connections. The results were averaged across simulations and reported as mean ±standard error.Pattern SeparationThe first aspect we looked at was the effect of similarity between EC inputs on the degree of separation provided by themodel. For this purpose, different pairs of EC input patterns were generated and the amount of overlap between each pairwas manipulated by varying the percentage of active cells they share. Specifically, for each pair, a first pattern wasrandomly generated with 20 out of 200 cells being active, then a second pattern was constructed from the first one, byswitching the state of fixed number (n) of randomly chosen cells that were active (1) to silent (0) and the state of the samenumber of randomly chosen cells that were silent to active. This means that the similarity between two input patterns willdecrease for increasing values of n (for n=1, 19 of the 20 active EC cells will be active in both patterns, and then the inputsimilarity measured by the normalized dot product is 0.95; while for n=19, only one of the 20 active EC cells are active inboth patterns, and the input similarity is 0.05). For each pair, the similarities between DG/CA3 responses were compared8with the similarity between the corresponding input patterns (Fig. 3). Pattern separation occurs if the similarity measured atDG/CA3 outputs is less than the similarity measured at the input.Fig. 3A shows that, when the similarity between the input patterns was low, both the S and S-I-O models demonstratedsimilar pattern separation capabilities. However, in the S model, pattern separation was weak in the DG, and completelyfailed in CA3, as input similarity was increased; in contrast, this increase in similarity did not appear to degrade patternseparation in the S-I-O model. To verify these impressions, an overall three-way ANOVA was conducted with model (S vs.S-I-O) and region (DG vs. CA3) as the between factors and input similarity as the within factor. The analysis yielded a maineffect of model (F1,540=482.76, P<0.001), a main effect of region (F1,540=164.14, P<0.001), and a main effect of similarity(F19,180=38.86, P<0.001), with significant interaction effects (for all combinations, P<0.001). Post-hoc analyses weresubsequently performed to get more insight into these results.Repeated-measures ANOVA confirmed that the S model showed both a significant decrease in pattern separation as inputsimilarity increased (F19,180=55.98, P<0.001), and a significant difference between the DG and CA3 regions (F1,180=307.20,P<0.001); there was also a significant similarity×region interaction (F19,180=16.76, P<0.001); this effect was only significantfor inputs with high similarities (Input similarity>0.6, all P<0.01) but not for lower similarities (all P>0.05). In large partsimilar results were reported by earlier modeling studies, e.g., (O’Reilly and McClelland, 1994), which have suggested thatCA3 pattern separation is not as robust as in the DG due to higher activity levels in CA3. While this suggestion may partlyexplain our results as well, we found that Hebbian plasticity in the direct EC-CA3 pathway accounts more for the degradedCA3 pattern separation in the basic model; during recall, much overlap between EC inputs caused significant interference inCA3 responses.The S-I-O model checks for this effect ahead of time and allows for more elaborated processing in cases where a potentialinterference is identified. Specifically, pattern separation was performed strongly and quasi-equally for all pairs of inputs,regardless of their mutual similarity (One-way ANOVA, DG: F19,180=5.56, P<0.01; CA3: F19,180=1.58, P=0.063). Repeated-measures ANOVA suggested a significant similarity×region interaction (F19,180=1.89, P=0.017), but post-hoc tests revealedno significant difference between the DG and CA3 at most levels of input similarity. The significant effect emerged mainlyfrom the highest level of similarity, due to the absolute orthogonalization in CA3 which gives rise to an output similarity ofzero. The results also demonstrated a highly significant improvement in pattern separation abilities over the basic model inboth regions. Post-hoc tests showed that the significant effect was mainly driven by pairs with high similarity (Inputsimilarity>0.6, all P<0.05 in the DG and CA3).In Fig. 3B, it is possible to identify which of the three circuits in the S-I-O model has intervened to encode the secondpattern in each pair of inputs. As expected, sparsification predominated at low input similarity, inhibition predominantlyoccurred at medium similarity, while orthogonalization predominated at high levels of similarity. The individualcontributions of these circuits are evaluated separately using the S-I and S-O models (Fig. 3C and 3D). The effect oforthogonalization can clearly be seen at high levels of similarity (ANOVA with post-hoc tests, DG: all P<0.001 for inputsimilarity greater than 0.75; CA3: P<0.05 for input similarity greater than 0.7). The effect of inhibition was not significant(P>.05). These results are not surprising and can be attributed to two factors. First, the default values of MC thresholds (θland θh) were selected such that inhibition should be activated at low levels of interference. Second, as a pattern-separationmechanism, inhibition is less robust than orthogonalization. Inhibition can protect the later pattern against interference,though at the cost of making the early “similar” pattern more vulnerable to interference. With orthogonalization, the earlypattern is not affected by the orthogonalized pattern because both learning and retrieval of these two patterns involveseparate pathways.In order to clarify the latter point, we repeated the simulations outlined above with only one of the inhibition ororthogonalization circuits allowed to be activated at any level of interference. One way to achieve this is by changing thedefault values for MC thresholds; for example, the inhibition circuit can be completely disabled by setting θl=θh=0, whilethe orthogonalization circuit can be completely disabled by setting θl=0 and θh=1. Fig. 4 depicts the results for these twoextreme cases. If we contrast these results with Fig. 3A, we can see that inhibition (S-I) had a stronger tendency towardpattern separation than was the case with the basic model (S) (Paired tests, DG: all P<0.05 for input similarity greater than0.6; CA3: P<0.05 for input similarity greater than 0.7 with one exception). On the other hand, inhibition exhibitedsignificantly higher similarity between CA3 outputs than orthogonalization did (Paired tests, all P<0.05 for input similaritygreater than 0.55; Fig. 4). This is again because the retrieval of the early pattern was abolished by the concurrent storage ofthe later pattern on the direct EC-CA3 synapses. Recall led to a superimposition of the two stored memories, an effect that9was masked by inhibition in the case of the later pattern, not the early one. Because orthogonalization does not alter learningat the direct EC-CA3 pathway, it does not affect retrieval of other non-orthogonalized patterns. This pattern of results led us to question what may happen if the paired patterns are presented twice to the S-I model forlearning purpose. Would the inhibition-mediated mechanism be able to reduce the retroactive interference caused by thestorage of the second pattern in a pair? In order to address this question, we repeated the above simulation with two learningtrials. On the second trial, learning was allowed to occur if the similarity between the retrieved pattern and the previously-stored pattern in CA3 was less than a matching threshold (υm). The quality of pattern separation was evaluated following thesecond presentation of the patterns (Fig. 5). By setting the matching threshold low (υm=0.7), no more learning could occuron the second trial; both patterns in a pair were found, according to the matching threshold, to be drawn to representationsthat were similar enough to the representations already stored on the first trial. Consequently, no significant difference wasobserved with respect to the results described above (ANOVA, 1P vs 2P; F19,180=0.96, P=0.51). Using a higher threshold formatching (υm=0.95), only the pattern encoded by recruiting the inhibition circuit on the first trial showed an exact match onthe second trial. Too often, at high input similarity, the other pattern in the pair could not satisfy the matching threshold,enabling learning to recur on the second trial. This is well illustrated in the results of Fig. 5C showing an increase in thenumber of HGC recruited after the second repetition of learning, suggesting that at high level of input similarity therepresentations of both patterns in a pair became mediated by the inhibition circuit. As a result, a significant improvement inpattern separation was observed after two learning trials (Fig. 5A). Specifically, there were main effects of both inputsimilarity (F19,180=59.85, P<0.001) and number of trials (F1,180=51.06, P<0.001) with a significant interaction (F19,180=6.13,P<0.001). Simple effects analysis of this interaction showed that learning on the second trials had no effect on patternseparation for pairs with low similarities (all P>0.05 for input similarity<0.7) while significantly improved patternseparation on pairs with higher similarities (all P<0.05). Storage CapacityThe observation that the S-I-O model can operate as a strong pattern separator, not only in the DG but also in CA3, suggeststhat this separation would have a significant impact on CA3 storage capacity as well. To substantiate this premise, the S andS-I-O models were trained to store a set of N input patterns, and then switched to recall mode in order to test their ability toretrieve the stored patterns (Fig. 6).A significant difference was noted between the S and S-I-O models (Fig. 6A). Specifically, ANOVA revealed a significantmain effect of model (F1,18182=11863.67, P<0.001), main effect of storage load (F8,18182=827.68, P<0.001) with a significantmodel×load interaction (F8,18182=661.78, P<0.001); post-hoc tests at each level of storage load (N) revealed that both modelswere able to retrieve the stored patterns almost perfectly for N≤50 (all P>0.05); but as the number of stored patternsincreased further, storage capacity significantly plummeted in the S model but not in the S-I-O model (all P<0.001 forN>50). Fig. 6B shows how orthogonalization was gradually engaged, along with inhibition, to come up with successfulretrieval of the stored patterns in the S-I-O model. Up to N=150, the maximum numbers of HGC/HCA3 were kept asdefault. We then wanted to see how the model would perform if more cells were available. We found (Fig. 6A and B, grayshaded area) that the S-I-O model was able to maintain its performance as the number of stored patterns increased to 175 orto 200, however, orthogonalization was engaged in the encoding of more than 80% of the additional stored patterns(HCA3=40.9 at N=150 vs. 82.2 at N=200). This is because the PPCA3 network seems to operate near saturation as Nincreases beyond 150; therefore, a high level of potential interference can occur more frequently. Althoughorthogonalization could improve performance under this condition, it is important to bear in mind that the functionalsignificance of the process of orthogonalization goes beyond mere boost in storage capacity at near saturation in the model.To further emphasize this point, we increased θh, with respect to its default value to favor inhibition over orthogonalization.This could increase storage capacity up to N=200 by recruiting orthogonalization only in response to extremely highinterference (HCA3=37.4 for N=200); however, this came at the price of a significant decrease in the quality of retrieval(ANOVA, main effect of model, F1,18182=1399.18, P<0.001; post-hoc tests, all P<0.01 for N>50). This suggests that thedefault threshold values drive the behavior of the model in a way that resonates better with the proposed role for theorthogonalization circuit in the model. In order to further quantify the specific contributions of inhibition and orthogonalization circuits, we repeated the abovesimulations with the S-I and S-O models. By contrasting the results in Fig. 6A, C and E, it can be seen that the S-I-O modelperformed much better than either of the reduced models; at the default values of MC thresholds, for example, retrievalperformance was significantly higher (ANOVA, S-I-O vs. S-O, main effect, F1,18182=440.62, P<0.001; S-I-O vs. S-O, main10effect, F1,18182=3665.96, P<0.001; post-hoc tests, S-I-O vs. S-O and S-I-O vs. S-I: all P<0.01 for N≥100) while no significantincrease was observed in the number of HCA3 recruited to deal with interference (ANOVA, S-I-O vs. S-O: P=0.5). At highstorage load, the number of HGC recruited by the S-I model decreased slightly (ANOVA with post-hoc tests, S-I-O vs S-I:P<0.001 for N>100). This reflects an increase in interference when orthogonalization is compromised. The differencebetween inhibition and orthogonalization was more apparent when either circuit was allowed to be recruited for any level ofinterference (orthogonalization with θh=0, Fig. 6C; inhibition with θl=0 and θh=1, Fig. 6E). In this latter case, the S-O modelprovided optimal retrieval performance, whereas the S-I model could not retrieve all stored patterns correctly becauseinhibition reduced but did not completely suppress interference among the stored patterns. It is also worth noting from theresults shown in Fig. 6C-F that varying the number of HGC/HCA3 up or down from default values does not systematicallyaffect the performance of the model at fixed threshold values. That is to say, for the same number of stored patterns,increasing the number of HCA3 is not sufficient to increase recall accuracy unless a concomitant decrease in θh is made tofavor recruitment of orthogonalization at lower levels of interference (Fig. 6C and D).SIMULATION OF EMPIRICAL DATAThe Involvement of the DG in Encoding and Retrieval ProcessesOn a theoretical basis, Rolls and Treves have argued that the mossy fiber input to CA3 may be necessary for memoryencoding but not for retrieval; the latter may be initiated by the direct perforant path input to CA3 (Treves and Rolls, 1994;Rolls, 2013). However, empirical evidence appears to be mixed regarding the involvement of the DG during recall; somestudies suggest that the DG is only needed for encoding new memories (Lassalle et al., 2000; Lee and Kesner, 2004), whileothers suggest a role in both encoding and retrieval (Gilbert et al., 2001; McHugh et al., 2007; Hunsaker et al., 2008;Goodrich-Hunsaker et al., 2008; Hunsaker et al., 2008; Daumas et al., 2009; Nakashiba et al., 2012). This discrepancy mightpotentially reflect differences in task conditions. Where the task is trial-unique, behavioral impairments are mostly observedunder conditions of subtle discrimination (Gilbert et al., 2001) or high emotional salience (Daumas et al., 2009). In (Lassalle et al., 2000), selective blockade of mossy fibers exhibited learning deficits on a spatial learning task in theMorris water maze, but had no effect on recall. In contrast, short-term memory retrieval deficits were produced byimmediate post-training blockade of mossy fibers in contextual fear conditioning tasks (Daumas et al., 2004, 2009). Theseresults could be reasonably taken to suggest that the hippocampus, with DG mossy fibers inactivated, might have failed inconsolidating learning at CA3 synapses in contextual fear conditioning but not in spatial learning tasks. Based on ourmodel, an alternative account would be that the DG-CA3 network invokes distinct circuits for memory encoding in thesetwo specific aversive tasks. Beside the level of input similarity with previously stored memories, the level of emotionalarousal induced by the experience may play a key part in determining which circuitry needs to be recruited during memoryencoding of a specific experience. Specifically, we assume that sparsification can be associated with learning under low-arousal conditions, as seems to be the case in the spatial task since the water temperature was warm (Lassalle et al., 2000);since learning occurs at the EC-CA3 and CA3-CA3 synapses, the non-engagement of the DG following post-traininginactivation of mossy fibers should not affect retrieval. On the other hand, an increased demand on pattern separation maybe triggered under conditions of relatively high arousal, as is the case for fear conditioning, and therefore, learning mightrely substantially more on the DG than on CA3. Consistent with this prediction is evidence demonstrating enhancing effectsof arousal on pattern separation (Segal et al., 2012; Leal et al., 2014). Interestingly, this enhancement appears to be mediatedby an increase in norepinephrine activity during encoding (Segal et al., 2012). This suggests that the inactivation of mossyfibers by diethyldithiocarbamate in the spatial learning task (Lassalle et al., 2000) might down-regulate the need for the DGto engage in pattern separation, while a compensatory increase of norepinephrine release may be induced by the aversiveshock in fear conditioning tasks (Daumas et al., 2004), leading to normal or even increased load on pattern separation.As another example, Gilbert et al. (2001) used a delayed-match-to-sample paradigm to test rats, with colchicine-inducedlesions in their DG, for their one-trial memory of spatial locations. During the sample phase, rats were trained to displace anobject, which covered 1 of 15 locations along a row of food wells, to receive a food reward and return to the start-box on acheese-board maze. The rats were then required to choose between two objects identical to the sample phase object; onecovered the same well as the sample phase object (correct choice), while the second object covered a different unbaited wellalong the row of food wells (incorrect choice). Five spatial separations, 15, 37.5, 60, 82.5, and 105 cm, were randomly usedto separate the correct object and the foil object during the choice phase. The results showed that control rats learn the taskwith 75% or better accuracy based on 80 trials, whereas DG-lesioned rats were significantly impaired at short and mediumspatial separations (15, 37.5, and 60 cm) but their performance grew much better at large separations (82.5 and 105 cm).11Based on their results, Gilbert et al. (2001) argued that rats rely on distal environmental cues to differentiate between spatiallocations, and that DG pattern separation computations should be critical when the two locations are close together becausethe overlap between distal cues would be high.We replicated the spatial discrimination component of the task of Gilbert et al. (2001) in the model using a set of 25 pairs ofinput patterns, each pair having a similarity of 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 or 0.9. The number of pairs was equated across the fivedegrees of similarity. During encoding, all the pairs were presented randomly to the model (the paired patterns werepresented sequentially) and the output patterns were recorded. Then the pairs were presented again to the model with theDG activated (control) or inactivated (lesion). The ability of the model to distinguish between the two patterns in each pairis assessed in terms of the similarity between the CA3 output responses (Fig. 7A). We also measured the retrievalperformance in terms of the similarity between stored and recalled patterns (Fig. 7C). The results were grouped andaveraged according to the similarity of the input patterns comprising the different pairs. Although this setup does notcorrespond exactly to the working memory component of the delayed-match-to-sample task, an argument could be madethat the assessment of the discrimination ability can be linked to choice performance in the task; this is meant in the sensethat a low similarity between the spatial representations of the target object and the foil can be presumed to reflect an abilityto make a correct choice due to low probability of interference at the level of the place-reward associations that could beformed within or outside the hippocampus (Rolls, 2013; Kassab and Alexandre, 2015).As can be shown in Fig. 7A, the model with the DG inactivated maintained its performance on pairs with low similarity butcompletely failed to separate input patterns with high similarity. A repeated-measures two-way ANOVA revealed asignificant lesion×similarity interaction, F4,20=101.40, P<0.001. Simple effects analysis of this interaction showed that thelesioned model performed as well as the control model on pairs with a similarity of 0.1 (P=0.7) or 0.3 (P=0.16) butperformed significantly worse on pairs with higher similarities (P<0.01). This is because the inactivation of DG-mediatedinhibition, which is used only occasionally to overcome a very low risk of interference on pairs with low similarity (Fig.7B), does not prevent the retrieval of the stored patterns but may decline the quality of retrieval, an effect that begins to beclearer on pairs with medium similarity. On pairs with high similarity, orthogonalization is used more frequently (Fig. 5B).In this case, the inactivation of DG blocks access to the representations of the orthogonalized patterns; this is why thelesioned model retrieved the representation of the other pattern in the pair, instead (Fig. 7A and C).Morphing Environments In another approach, electrophysiological recordings have been used to track changes in hippocampal activity patternsduring exposure to different environments that were gradually morphed between two familiar environments with differentshapes, a square and a circle. The study by Wills et al. (2005) showed that, for small morphs, CA3 activity patterns areattracted to either of the preestablished representations of the square or the circle. In contrast, Leutgeb et al. (2007)simultaneously recorded DG and CA3 principal cells and reported a gradual transition in both DG and CA3 activity patternsalong the morph sequence; however, DG was much more sensitive to small morphs than CA3. To show how the model addresses these data, a sequence of seven binary patterns with 10% activity were constructed bylinearly decreasing similarity through each pattern from the first to the last (Fig. 8). As in (Leutgeb et al., 2007), Patterns 1and 7 were initially stored in the model. Then we tested three different scenarios with the morph patterns. In the first,learning was disabled in the model, and then, all the patterns were presented in sequence and the DG and CA3 outputs wererecorded. As can be shown in Fig. 8, DG and CA3 responded very differently; DG exhibited a large decrease in thesimilarity between its responses to a stored pattern and a small morph (Patterns 1 to 2 or to 3), while, for small morphs, CA3activity patterns were aligned with one of the stored patterns, making a rather sharp transition similar to the one found inWills et al. (2005). We did not report the results obtained with the S model because learning of the patterns 1 and 7 occurredthrough sparsification in the S-I-O model, and thus, no significant difference was found between the two models.In the next two scenarios, we consider both models and learning was allowed to occur if the retrieved pattern in CA3 doesnot match any of the previously-stored patterns according to a low or a high threshold for matching, υm.With a low threshold, υm=0.7, learning occurred most often for intermediate morphs, in both the S model and the S-I-Omodel (Fig. 9A and B, respectively). Learning new representations for intermediate morphs decreased their similarity toCA3 representations for the two end shapes. Furthermore, since sparsification/inhibition based mechanisms, which tendedto dominate in the S-I-O model (Fig. 9C), do not guarantee an absolute separation between CA3 representations, small12morphs had a stronger tendency to retrieve a mixture of stored representations in CA3. This caused gradual transition in thepopulation activity of CA3, in a way that accords well with findings of Leutgeb et al. (2007). It is worth stressing, however,that the model would not produce such a transition if the EC input representations for intermediate shapes were biasedtowards that of either of the two end shapes, as it appears to be the case in (Wills et al., 2005).With the matching threshold increased, υm=0.95, learning could occur even for small morphs. This further linearizedtransitions in the S model due to increased interference from stored representations (Fig. 9A), while it made small morphsmore likely to be detected in the S-I-O model (Fig. 9B). As a result, a significant drop in the similarity between CA3representations was observed in the S-I-O model (F1,5=21.27, P<0.01), simply due to an increase in the recruitment oforthogonalization/inhibition based circuits during learning of small morphs (Fig. 9D). It is also possible to additionallyreduce this similarity to almost zero with a higher value for υm and/or lower values for MC thresholds. DISCUSSIONThe Conceptual Framework The present work offers a novel perspective on how the DG and CA3 are engaged during the encoding of episodicmemories. Our account suggests that (1) distinct circuits in the DG-CA3 network provide potential substrates for distinctmechanisms of pattern separation with different degrees of robustness against interference; (2) The hilus acts as a site ofconvergence for various inter- and intra-hippocampal signals mediating the selection of the most appropriate circuitry for agiven situation; (3) The controlling influence of these signals reflect interactions between bottom-up factors, such as patternsimilarity, and top-down factors, such as motivation, which together determine the required level of pattern separation; (4)The selection of circuitry derives from a trade-off between the level of pattern separation required and network resources.This account is instantiated in a simplified, biologically constrained, model of the DG-CA3 network. The model identifiesthree potential circuits underlying three pattern separation mechanisms: sparsification, inhibition, and orthogonalization.The primary circuit performs a sparse coding in which only a small proportion of the granule cells are active for any givenepisode. This sparse coding is governed by feedback inhibition without any learning-related changes to keep in with therapid, single-trial acquisition of episodic memory. Despite claims that sparseness would be the most efficient way to encodeepisodic memories, our simulation results, as other relevant studies (Weisz and Argibay, 2009; Myers and Scharfman, 2011),clearly demonstrate that this is not always the case, at least at the computational level. When the single-trial criterion is met,sparseness does not allow for optimal pattern separation behavior in response to high overlap in EC inputs (cf. Fig. 3), andthis directly impinges on the storage capacity of CA3 (cf. Fig. 6). The two other circuits are, therefore, introduced to supportsparsification.In both of these latter circuits, learning takes place in the granule cell-mossy cell-granule cell loop allowing a physicallyseparate population of granule cells (HGC) to form a second-level representation of EC inputs. A high overlap in inputcould cause an overlap in the primary population (PPGC) that carries the original, sparse representation of EC inputs and,consequently, an overlap in PPCA3 as well. In such a case, however, HGC can keep this overlap from affecting CA3 storageand recall in one of two ways. In the inhibition circuit, HGC can block out interference from previously stored memories.This strategy protects the stored memory from proactive interference but is likely to increase retroactive interference as thesame system (PPCA3) is used for storage and recall (cf. Fig. 4, 5 and 6E). Thus, inhibition could improve the quality ofretrieved memories but would not guarantee successful retrieval of all the stored patterns, especially at high levels ofinterference. In cases where both types of interference should be eradicated, HGC can provide excitatory drive to a spatiallyseparate population of CA3 pyramidal cells (HCA3), setting up a complete orthogonal representation for the memory to bestored more effectively in CA3. The simulation results show that pattern separation could be maximized (cf. Fig. 4) andoptimal retrieval could be achieved relying solely on orthogonalization (cf. Fig. 6E).It is important to underscore that orthogonalization is expected to contribute to pattern separation only if necessary becauseCA3 pyramidal cells are limited in number when compared with dentate granule cells. This expectation is consistent withexisting empirical evidence showing that pattern separation is not always optimal (Yassa and Stark, 2011; Leutgeb et al.,2007; Deng et al., 2013). In the morphing experiments of Leutgeb et al. (2007), for example, a nearly linear decrease wasobserved in the correlation between CA3 population responses as morphing increased. While our model was able to producesimilar results (cf. Fig. 9), it could also further significantly improve discrimination between small morphs, primarily byincreasing the matching threshold to favor learning, and secondarily by decreasing MC thresholds to favor13inhibition/orthogonalization over sparsification. We speculate that absolute discrimination between morphs was notempirically seen due to the lack of any emotional, motivational, or attentional modulation in the morphing environments. Itwould be reasonable to expect dramatically different results if the animal’s attention was directed to specific morphs, e.g.,via reward and fear-conditioning procedures. In line with this speculation, a recent electrophysiological study tested miceduring exploratory food-motivated running in two highly similar boxes; however, unlike Leutgeb et al. (2007), two differentkinds of food rewards were offered in the different boxes: cereal (low-value reward) and chocolate (high-value reward)(Senzai and Buzsáki, 2017). In CA3, most cells were found to be active in one or the other box, while a significant overlapwas observed in the DG. These results can be explained in terms of a change in the animal's internal state which might beinduced by the difference in reward values associated with the two boxes and assume that this change might modulatepattern separation in a way that greater attention is given to subtle differences in environmental states.It was also evident from the results (cf. Fig. 3, 4 and 6) that a better performance-resource trade-off would be brought withboth inhibition and orthogonalization circuits included in the model, rather than with either one alone. The choice amongcircuits is associated with the integration of intrinsic and extrinsic signals which come to keep the DG informed about therequired level of pattern separation and the level of network resources. Such signals are likely to dynamically regulate theactivity of mossy cells either directly or indirectly via neuromodulatory effects, as also suggested in previous studies(Scharfman, 2007; Myers and Scharfman, 2009; Scharfman, 2016), rendering them more or less likely to be recruitedduring learning and, thus, allowing a more or less elaborated encoding to occur in the DG-CA3 network.Potential Neural Substrates and Functional Significance Crucially the known details of the DG-CA3 circuitry provide compelling support to the conceptual framework we proposefor the organization of DG/CA3 principal cells into functionally distinct circuits. Here we emphasize the heterogeneity ofthe DG/CA3 cells in terms of several important, albeit often neglected, anatomical and physiological properties and describehow they may be related to the proposed model.Although mature granule cells show great similarity in their morphological and intrinsic electrophysiological properties,their activity is regulated by highly heterogeneous inhibitory circuits (Amaral et al., 2007; Freund and Buzsáki, 1996).Particularly relevant is the effect of perforant path stimulation on granule cells which has been shown to be non-uniform inthat only a fraction of granule cells are responsive to stimulation, regardless of its intensity (Dieni et al., 2013; Yu et al.,2013); this effect was attributed to differential inhibition on granule cells because all the cells were able to respond wheninhibition was blocked. Asymmetry has also been identified in the ratio of inhibitory neurons across the DG (e.g. there aretwice as many basket cells in the suprapyramidal blade as in the infrapyramidal blade (Seress and Pokorny, 1981)), andrelated to differences in the recruitment of granule cells located in the two blades of the DG at different septotemporal levels(Scharfman et al., 2002; Alme et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2013). It is unclear, however, how various subtypes of GABAergicneurons contribute to the inherently limited responsiveness of granule cells.Our model raises the possibility that the activity of granule cells might be differentially controlled by local interneurons,with axons impinging precisely on the distal two-thirds of granule cell dendrites (Freund and Buzsáki, 1996), therebypreventing dendritic integration of EC excitation in a subset of granule cells and favoring their activation by their inputsfrom mossy cells. The intrinsic integrative properties of granule cell dendrites may also account for different modes of inputintegration and further attenuation of distal inputs (Krueppel et al., 2011). Accordingly, granule cells may be more easilyexcited by afferent inputs from either the EC or MC, leading to two independent populations of granule cells, similar tothose included in the model, PPGC and HGC. Perisomatic inhibition might provide a more specific mechanism to controlcompetition among the first population (PPGC) in response to the EC drive, thereby ensuring sparse activity, whereasdendritic inhibition keeps the second population (HGC) silent except under certain circumstances where they can becomeactive concomitantly with PPGC.Based on the currently available data, we consider HIPP cells, especially a subset with dendrites in the molecular layer, asthe most likely candidate for this inhibitory effect, as they are activated upon perforant path stimulation with a latencyshorter than granule cells (Scharfman, 1991), and appear to be innervated by direct monosynaptic input from the EC (Delleret al., 1996). This implies that inhibition is likely to precede and potentially dominate EC monosynaptic excitation ofgranule cells. In an alternative, not necessarily mutually exclusive, perspective, inputs other than direct EC projectionsmight be able to activate HIPP cells prior to encoding to ensure adequate temporal dynamics. These inputs could be fromdentate glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons, direct cholingeric and GABAergic inputs from the septum, and from deep14layer EC neurons which preferentially target GABAergic neurons in the inner molecular, the granule cell layer, and the hilus(Deller et al., 1996; Freund and Buzsáki, 1996; Amaral et al., 2007). Especially dentate glutamatergic neurons which showpersistent activation, such as semilunar granule cells (Larimer and Strowbridge 2010) and mossy cells (Duffy et al., 2013),might provide direct ongoing basal depolarizing input to hilar GABAergic neurons. It is further notable that HIPP cells arenot preferentially targeted by CA3 backprojections (Buckmaster et al., 1996; Wittner et al., 2006; Fig. 1), suggestingfunctional specialization of hilar interneurons. The model is also compatible with the possibility that HGC, or at least a fraction thereof, are adult-born neurons. Evenbefore they reach complete maturation, newborn neurons receive their first glutamatergic innervations from mossy cells(Chancey et al., 2014) and exhibit functional connectivity with CA3 after 2-3 weeks post-mitosis (Toni et al., 2008), andtherefore, can be functionally integrated at early stages in both inhibition and orthogonalization circuitry. This view is alsostrongly consistent with substantial experimental evidence supporting a pivotal role for adult neurogenesis in patternseparation (Clelland et al., 2009; Nakashiba et al., 2012). In CA3, the two spatially segregated populations of the model, PPCA3 and HCA3, have close correspondences withpyramidal cells in the distal and proximal portions of CA3, CA3a,b and CA3c, respectively (Ishizuka et al., 1990; Li et al.,1994; Scharfman, 2007; Witter, 2010). Cells in the distal portion have, like PPCA3, extensive recurrent collaterals thatdominate locally within CA3, whereas proximal cells, like HGC, have relatively weak local connectivity and short apicaldendrites that do not reach the stratum lacunosum-moleculare and, therefore, almost devoid of the direct monosynapticinput from the EC. The lack of direct EC innervation is compensated for by an increased density of mossy fiber input: Inproximal CA3, mossy fibers are distributed deep to, within, and superficial to the pyramidal cell layer, making “double”terminal fields upon apical and basal dendrites of the pyramidal cells in what have been called the suprapyramidal andinfrapyramidal mossy fiber bundles. The infrapyramidal bundle greatly decreases at distal CA3 where all mossy fibers tendto extend in the stratum lucidum parallel to the pyramidal cell layer. Also CA3c is the major source of CA3 collateralizationin the hilus (Scharfman, 2007). Altogether these anatomical features indicate that only distal CA3 pyramidal cells, and byanalogy PPCA3 in the present model, are compatible with an autoassociative memory function with a dual input forencoding and retrieval; the remaining cells at proximal parts, and by analogy HCA3 in the model, might subserve these twoprocesses differently and largely under the control of mossy fiber afferents. Given the distoproximal increasing gradients of CA3 backprojection (Li et al., 1994; Scharfman, 2007; Witter, 2010), theactions of CA3 pyramidal cells on hilar cells might not be directly exerted by distal cells (PPCA3) but by disynapticactivation via CA3c cells. It is also important to note that it is, thus far, unclear whether CA3 pyramidal cells may directlyexcite mossy cells (although indirect evidence exists, e.g. Scharfman,1994), suggesting that CA3 backprojection actionsmay be polysynaptically mediated, or at least facilitated, by direct interaction with the septum or other structures.Also of related interest is the finding that granule cells roughly follow a topographic organization in their projections toCA3, with cells in the suprapyramidal blade preferentially projecting to distal CA3, and cells in the infrapyramidal bladepreferentially projecting to proximal CA3 (Witter, 2010). Along the same lines, Galimberti et al. (2010) demonstrated thatmossy fibers exhibit significant structural plasticity that proceeds according to similar topographic principles. Also theaxons of newborn neurons preferentially (albeit not exclusively) contribute to the infrapyramidal mossy fiber bundle(Römer et al., 2011), whose size has been linked early on with better hippocampal-dependent learning capabilities (Crusioand Schwegler, 2005). It may be, therefore, useful to entertain the possibility that PPGC and HGC might not be uniformlydispersed along the DG blades. Specifically, PPGC might be more present in the suprapyramidal blade where GABAergicinterneurons are more numerous and more densely innervated by mossy fibers (Seress and Pokorny, 1981; Ribak andPeterson, 1991), whereas the orthogonalization action on CA3 might mainly be exerted by granule cells in theinfrapyramidal blade via their direct projections on the proximal basal dendrites of CA3c. It is also tempting to think of thetwo mossy fiber inputs in CA3c in terms of an economy drive to use CA3c pyramidal cells. When CA3c cells are driven byapical inputs alone, they may fire at low firing rates and can be considered as being part of PPCA3 duringsparsification/inhibition. On the other hand, when CA3c cells are driven by additional inputs on their proximal basaldendrites, they may fire at high firing rates as being part of HCA3 during orthogonalization. Such firing rate encoding hasbeen observed empirically (Leutgeb et al., 2007); however, our prediction is that the change in CA3 firing rates may be aresult of using different pattern separation mechanisms, instead of being a pattern separation mechanism per se. Yet, it isimportant to stress that any conclusion in this respect should be treated cautiously due to differences among strains andspecies (Crusio and Schwegler, 2005).15Predictions and ExperimentsIt is apparent from the preceding section that our model represents a radical departure from traditional single-populationmodels, especially in that it can account for why retrieval deficits are observed under certain experimental circumstancesbut not others following post-training lesions of the DG (e.g., Gilbert et al. (2001); Daumas et al. (2009)). While ouraccount holds the general understanding that the DG has the ability to amplify differences in input patterns throughsparsification, it goes further by suggesting that the DG, under conditions of high load on pattern separation, learns to boostdiscrimination via additional mechanisms: inhibition or orthogonalization. Whenever either of these two mechanisms isinvolved in learning, DG lesion will lead to deficits in memory retrieval but for different reasons.Because inhibition simply acts to prevent irrelevant pyramidal cells from responding to input from the direct perforantpathway, lesioning DG does not abolish retrieval per se but leads to a decline in the quality of retrieval due to an inability totrigger the inhibition-mediated discriminatory mechanism that has been set up in the DG. Alternatively, whenorthogonalization is engaged during learning, the indirect perforant input via the DG (EC-DG-CA3) provides the onlypathway to reach the orthogonalized memory representations in CA3, and therefore, a complete failure in retrieval will beproduced by DG lesions.Much evidence from previous studies can be taken as preliminary support of this prediction. For instance, a positivecorrelation was observed between memory precision and learning-induced increases in mossy fiber terminals onto CA3interneurons (Ruediger et al., 2011; Restivo et al., 2015). It is plausible that adult-born granule cells heavily account for thiscorrelation as they have significantly more contacts with CA3 interneurons than mature granule cells (Restivo et al., 2015)and silencing their outputs does affect pattern separation in CA3 (Clelland et al., 2009; Nakashiba et al., 2012). Whetherthese observations vary along the proximodistal axis has not been explored, however. In keeping with the anatomical guidelines we have outlined above, our model would predict, more precisely, that: 1)memory precision depends on DG-mediated inhibition of distal CA3 where direct innervation by EC afferents is strong; 2)As we presume that mossy fiber transmission to CA3 pyramidal cells is inactivated during retrieval, this inhibition is morelikely to be mediated by interneurons projecting to the distal apical dendrites of CA3 pyramidal cells, such as O-LM(Freund and Buzsáki, 1996); 3) the increased inhibition acts to reduce, not to cancel, excitation in distal CA3. On the otherhand, when a complete loss of memory follows DG lesions, our model predicts a net shutdown of excitation in proximalCA3, but not necessarily in distal CA3; activity in distal CA3 could be observed especially if the orthogonalized memoryoverlaps with memories stored in distal CA3. It is worth noting that this latter prediction depends on two assumptions thatwarrant consideration. First, we presume within the current model that proximal CA3 has the ability to suppress activity indistal CA3 via inhibitory control. Still, we do not rule out a potential role for mossy fiber inputs in this inhibitory control ondistal CA3; empirical work will be needed to disentangle these two possibilities. Second, our model does not include directprojections from PPCA3 to HCA3 (which may be, as evoked above, the first element of a disynaptic pathway from CA3 tothe hilus, but also from CA3 to CA1), but it should be anticipated that, in vivo, distal CA3 could elicit excitation inproximal CA3, especially if the orthogonalized memory overlaps with memories stored in distal CA3. Testing the latterprediction experimentally may, therefore, require blockade of synaptic transmission at CA3 recurrent connections; one wayto avoid this additional manipulation is to identify experimental scenarios in which pattern separation occurs viaorthogonalization for other reasons than similarity. The emotional and motivational effects on pattern separation and hippocampal neural representations have beendemonstrated empirically (Kennedy and Shapiro, 2009; Nakashiba et al., 2012; Segal et al., 2012; Leal et al., 2014), thoughto a far lesser extent than pattern similarity. In this regard, it is intriguing that the hilus receives afferents from allneuromodulatory systems (Amaral et al., 2007), notably noradrenergic afferents from the locus coeruleus which are muchdenser than anywhere else in the hippocampus (Harley, 2007). These systems signal important environmental aspects suchas novelty, uncertainty, salience and risks, and thus are in position to exert strong influence on memory, learning, andbehavior. Our model predicts that these kinds of neuromodulatory signals occur either together or separately and act inconcert with cortical inputs to keep the DG informed about the changing demands on pattern separation under changingcircumstances. Specifically, we have demonstrated via the model that CA3 can detect memory interference arising frompattern similarity (cf. Fig. 9; Leutgeb et al., 2007) or spatial overlap in the external environment (cf. Fig. 7; Gilbert et al.,2001). With increasing levels of similarity, CA3 feedback excitation of mossy cells increases and leads to increaseddiscriminability from other memories. At the same time, we have demonstrated by varying MC thresholds (cf. Fig. 3 and 6)that other extrahippocampal signals that converge to the hilus can modulate the activity of hilar mossy cells, either directly16or indirectly through their effects on hilar interneurons. Consistent with this prediction is evidence for selectivenorepinephrine modulation of mossy cells and different types of hilar interneurons (Bijak and Misgeld, 1995) and fornorepinephrine-mediated enhancing effects on pattern separation (Segal et al., 2012; Leal et al., 2014). A somewhat similar prediction was made by previous studies (Myers and Scharfman, 2009, 2011; Jinde et al., 2012) but theengagement of hilar cells was suggested to modulate sparsity of activity in the DG through their drive onto DG granulecells. Our account differs both computationally and functionally, at least, in three fundamental aspects. First, we assume thata major function of mossy cells is to integrate signals they receive and to accordingly shuttle the control between distinctpathways that underlie the DG’s engagement in pattern separation. This assumption, however, is not mutually exclusivewith previous suggestions which are relevant to the sparsification mechanism included in the present model. Second, weassume that hilar interneurons, especially HIPP cells, may prevent a subpopulation of granule cells from responding to ECafferents through their inhibitory action on distal dendrites of granule cells. The diversity of afferent inputs to HIPP cells,however, suggest that a more complex circuitry may contribute to this inhibitory function to ensure adequate networkdynamics. It is also worth noting that the loss of this dendritic inhibition in the proposed model can entail a strong increaseof excitability with the majority of HGC being activated, and thus can account for granule cell hyperexcitability that followshilar cell loss, including mossy cells and inhibitory interneurons (Jinde et al., 2012), in a way quite different from thecurrently available hypotheses (Scharfman, 2016). Third, we assume heterogeneity in mossy cell responsiveness to CA3backprojection, possibly due to differential CA3-mediated inhibition on these cells. Precisely how mossy cells act inresponse to CA3 input remains to be determined empirically. Another point to consider is related to the interpretation of experimental observations. Previous experiments involvingelectrophysiological recordings have suggested that overlapping populations of granule cells participate in multiplerepresentations of individual memories (Leutgeb et al., 2007; Alme et al., 2010), while other studies, using immediate-earlygene activation, have shown that distinct granule cell populations encode similar but non-identical memories with relativelylimited overlap (Chawla et al., 2005; Deng et al., 2013). This discrepancy is part of what makes the DG’s function in patternseparation very puzzling. It is fair, however, to mention that appealing explanations have been proposed but, rather, in termsof a single functional population, or functionally independent populations, of granule cells. Alternatively, based on ourmodel, these findings can be revisited in terms of multiple functional populations of granule cells that can be simultaneouslybrought into activity under certain conditions. Specifically, we speculate that high overlap can be observed in the DG in twodifferent situations with potentially high level of interference due to similarity. In situations with high attentional ormotivational loads, as discussed earlier in reward or fear-conditioning experiments, input similarity can be detected in CA3and lead to the recruitment of HGC which becomes simultaneously active with PPGC; overlap in PPGC, which is expectedto occur due to input similarity, could be associated with the overlap that was empirically observed in the DG. In this case,however, no, or at least much less, overlap should be expected, after learning, in CA3. In other situations, as discussed inthe morphing experiments, encoding may never occur or occur through sparsification alone; in this latter case, increasedoverlap should be expected in the DG but also, to a similar or even greater extent, in CA3.Crucially, based on the analysis above, inference can be made about which circuit of the model is activated by specifyingthe regional variations in overlap in response to different experiences; sparsification can be inferred if overlap is low or highin both DG and CA3, while other circuits are more likely if overlap is higher in DG than it is in CA3. Especially in thislatter case, granule cells should not be lumped together; instead, potential subpopulations have to be individually targeteddepending on whether they show unique or overlapping responses. Our account suggests that granule cells with experience-specific responses, even if significantly less numerous, would be the key players in the successful separation in CA3. Ofcourse, this possibility remains speculative but, hopefully, points to new directions to design more detailed experimentscharacterizing functional differences in potential subpopulations of granule cells.ConclusionThe present work enriches current perspectives on how pattern separation might function throughout the DG-CA3 network.The hypothesis that distinct circuits coexist and contribute differentially to this process makes sense of various experimentalobservations that have, thus far, defied explanations at both computational and biological levels. The existing evidence,while compatible with the hypothesis, is still preliminary and much work remains to be done to validate the present modeland identify actual circuits and mechanisms. The anatomical details and the various experimentally testable predictions wehave presented in this paper would, hopefully, help move forward in this direction.17It should be noted that our model is simplified, for the purpose of clarity, in a way meant to only capture fundamentalelements of our hypothesis as a whole. It is the focus of our ongoing work to improve both the biological and functionalsignificances of the model, especially by considering the dynamics of newborn neurons in the DG and by integratingadditional relevant extra- and intrahippocampal structures to explore in more detail their modulatory effects on patternseparation. Also, of potentially great interest for future investigations is to check whether the coexistence of distinct DG-CA3 circuits mediating pattern separation emerges from evolutionary or developmental expansions (Treves et al., 2008).Compliance with Ethical StandardsConflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of theauthors.REFERENCESAcsády, L., Kamondi, A., S k, A., Freund, T., and Buzsáki, G. (1998), GABAergic cells are the major postsynaptic targets ofmossy fibers in the rat hippocampus, J Neurosci., 18, 9, 3386-3403Aimone, J. B., Wiles, J., and Gage, F. H. (2009), Computational influence of adult neurogenesis on memory encoding,Neuron, 61, 2, 187-202Alme, C., Buzzetti, R., Marrone, D., Leutgeb, J., Chawla, M., Schaner, M., et al. (2010), Hippocampal granule cells opt forearly retirement, Hippocampus, 20, 10, 1109-23Aloisi, A., Casamenti, F., Scali, C., and Carli, G. P. G. G. (1997), Effects of novelty, pain and stress on hippocampalextracellular acetylcholine levels in male rats, Brain Res., 748, 1-2, 219-26Amaral, D. G., Scharfman, H. E., and Lavenex, P. (2007), The dentate gyrus: fundamental neuroanatomical organization(dentate gyrus for dummies), Prog Brain Res., 163, 3-22Amari, S. (1989), Characteristics of sparsely encoded associative memory, Neural Networks, 2, 6, 451-457Andersen, P., Bliss, T. V. P., and Skrede, K. K. (1971), Lamellar organization of hippocampal excitatory pathways, Exp.Brain Res., 13, 2, 222-238Bakker, A., Kirwan, C. B., Miller, M., and Stark, C. E. (2008), Pattern separation in the human hippocampal CA3 anddentate gyrus, Science, 319, 5870, 1640-2Berron, D., Schütze, H., Cardenas-Blanco, A. M. A., Kuijf, H. J., Kumaran, D., and Düzel, E. (2016), Strong evidence forpattern separation in human dentate gyrus., J Neurosci., 36, 29, 7569-79Bijak, M., and Misgeld, U. (1995), Adrenergic modulation of hilar neuron activity and granule cell inhibition in the guinea-pig hippocampal slice, Neuroscience, 67, 3, 541-50Bliss, T. V. and Lomo, T. (1973), Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate area of the anaesthetizedrabbit following stimulation of the perforant path, J Physiol, 232, 2, 331-356Buckmaster, P. S. and Schwartzkroin, P. A. (1994), Hippocampal mossy cell function: a speculative view, Hippocampus, 4,4, 393-402Buckmaster, P. S., Wenzel, H. J., Kunkel, D. D., and Schwartzkroin, P. A. (1996), Axon arbors and synaptic connections ofhippocampal mossy cells in the rat in vivo, J Comp Neurol., 366, 2, 271-92 Chancey, H. J., Poulsen, D. J., Wadiche, J. I., and Overstreet-Wadiche, L. (2014), Hilar mossy cells provide the firstglutamatergic synapses to adult-born dentate granule cells, Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 6, 2349-2354Chawla, M. K., Guzowski, J. F., Ramirez-Amaya, V., Lipa, P., Hoffman, K. L., Marriott, L. K., et al. (2005), Sparse,environmentally selective expression of Arc RNA in the upper blade of the rodent fascia dentata by brief spatial experience,Hippocampus, 15, 5, 579-586Clelland, C., Choi, M., Romberg, C., Clemenson, G. J., Fragniere, A., Tyers, P., et al. (2009), A functional role for adulthippocampal neurogenesis in spatial pattern separation, Science, 325, 5937, 210-3Crusio, W. E. and Schwegler, H. (2005), Learning spatial orientation tasks in the radial-maze and structural variation in thehippocampus in inbred mice, Behav Brain Funct., 1, 318Daumas, S., Ceccom, J., Halley, H., Francés, B., and Lassalle, J.-M. (2009), Activation of metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2/3 supports the involvement of the hippocampal mossy fiber pathway on contextual fear memory consolidation, LearnMem., 16, 8, 504-7Daumas, S., Halley, H., and Lassalle, J.-M. (2004), Disruption of hippocampal CA3 network: effects on episodic-likememory processing in c57bl/6j mice, European Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 2, 597-600 de Almeida, L., Idiart, M., and Lisman, J. E. (2007), Memory retrieval time and memory capacity of the CA3 network: roleof gamma frequency oscillations, Learn Mem, 14, 11, 795-806Deller, T., Martinez, A., Nitsch, R., and Frotscher, M. (1996), A novel entorhinal projection to the rat dentate gyrus: directinnervation of proximal dendrites and cell bodies of granule cells and GABAergic neurons, J. Neurosci., 16, 10, 3322--33Deng, W., Mayford, M., and Gage, F. H. (2013), Selection of distinct populations of dentate granule cells in response toinputs as a mechanism for pattern separation in mice, eLife, 2, e00312Dieni, C., Nietz, A. K., Panichi, R., Wadiche, J., and Overstreet-Wadiche, L. (2013), Distinct determinants of sparseactivation during granule cell maturation, J Neurosci., 33, 49, 19131-42Duffy, A. M., Schaner, M. J., and J. Chin J, a. H. E. S. (2013), Expression of c-fos in hilar mossy cells of the dentate gyrusin vivo, Hippocampus, 23, 8, 649-55Eichenbaum, H. (2004), Hippocampus: cognitive processes and neural representations that underlie declarative memory,Neuron, 44, 1, 109-20Freund, T. F. and Buzsáki, G. (1996), Interneurons of the hippocampus, Hippocampus, 6, 4, 347-470 Galimberti, I., Bednarek, E., Donato, F., and Caroni, P. (2010), Epha4 signaling in juveniles establishes topographicspecificity of structural plasticity in the hippocampus, Neuron, 65, 5, 627-42Ge, S., Yang, C. H., Hsu, K. S., Ming, G. L., and Song, H. (2007), A critical period for enhanced synaptic plasticity in newlygenerated neurons of the adult brain, Neuron, 54, 4, 559-66Gilbert, P. E., Kesner, R. P., and Lee, I. (2001), Dissociating hippocampal subregions: double dissociation between dentategyrus and ca1, Hippocampus, 11, 6, 626-36Gluck, M. A., Meeter, M., and Myers, C. E. (2003), Computational models of the hippocampal region: linking incrementallearning and episodic memory, 7, 6, 269-276Goodrich-Hunsaker, N. J., Hunsaker, M. R., and Kesner, R. P. (2008), The interactions and dissociations of the dorsalhippocampus subregions: how the dentate gyrus, CA3, and CA1 process spatial information, Behav Neurosci., 122, 1, 16-26Harley, C. W. (2007), Norepinephrine and the dentate gyrus, Prog Brain Res., 163, 299-318Hasselmo, M. E., Bodelón, C., and Wyble, B. P. (2002), A proposed function for hippocampal theta rhythm: Separate phasesof encoding and retrieval enhance reversal of prior learning, Neural Comput., 14, 4, 793-817Hasselmo, M. E., Wyble, B. P., and Wallenstein, G. V. (1996), Encoding and retrieval of episodic memories: Role ofcholinergic and GABAergic modulation in the hippocampus, Hippocampus, 6, 6, 693-708Hetherington, P. A., Austin, K. B., and Shapiro, M. L. (1994), Ipsilateral associational pathway in the dentate gyrus: anexcitatory feedback system that supports N-methyl-D-aspartate-dependent long-term potentiation, Hippocampus, 4, 4, 422-38Hunsaker, M. R., Rosenberg, J. S., and Kesner, R. P. (2008), The role of the dentate gyrus, CA3a,b, and CA3c for detectingspatial and environmental novelty, Hippocampus, 18, 10, 1064-73Ishizuka, N., Weber, J., and Amaral, D. G. (1990), Organization of intrahippocampal projections originating from ca3pyramidal cells in the rat, J Comp Neurol., 295, 4, 580-623Jackson, M. B., Scharfman, H. E. (1996), Positive feedback from hilar mossy cells to granule cells in the dentate gyrusrevealed by voltage-sensitive dye and microelectrode recording, J Neurophysiol., 76, 1, 601-16Jinde, S., Zsiros, V., Jiang, Z., Nakao, K., Pickel, J., Kohno, K., et al. (2012), Hilar mossy cell degeneration causes transientdentate granule cell hyperexcitability and impaired pattern separation, Neuron, 76, 6, 1189-200Kassab R., and Alexandre F. (2015), Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information within the hippocampus: acomputational study. Front Syst Neurosci., 5, 9, 87Kee, N., Teixeira, C., Wang, A., and Frankland, P. (2007), Preferential incorporation of adult-generated granule cells intospatial memory networks in the dentate gyrus, Nat Neurosci., 10, 3, 355-62Kennedy, P. J., and Shapiro, M. L. (2009), Motivational states activate distinct hippocampal representations to guide goal-directed behaviors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 106, 10805-10810 19Kleschevnikov, A. M., and Routtenberg, A. (2003), Long-term potentiation recruits a trisynaptic excitatory associativenetwork within the mouse dentate gyrus, Eur J Neurosci., 17, 12, 2690-702Knoblauch, A., Palm, G., and Sommer, F. T. (2010), Memory capacities for synaptic and structural plasticity, NeuralComputation, 22, 2, 289-341Krueppel, R., Remy, S., and Beck, H. (2011), Dendritic integration in hippocampal dentate granule cells, Neuron, 71, 3,512-28Larimer, P. and Strowbridge, B. W. (2008), Nonrandom local circuits in the dentate gyrus, J Neurosci., 28, 47, 12212-23Larimer, P. and Strowbridge, B.W. (2010), Representing information in cell assemblies: persistent activity mediated bysemilunar granule cells, Nat Neurosci., 13, 2, 213-22Lassalle, J. M., Bataille, T., and Halley, H. (2000), Reversible inactivation of the hippocampal mossy fiber synapses in miceimpairs spatial learning, but neither consolidation nor memory retrieval, in the Morris navigation task, Neurobiol LearnMem., 73, 3, 243-57Leal, S.L., Tighe, S.K., Jones, C.K., and Yassa, M.A. (2014), Pattern separation of emotional information in hippocampaldentate and CA3, Hippocampus, 24, 9, 1146-55Lee, I., Hunsaker, M., and Kesner, R. (2005), The role of hippocampal subregions in detecting spatial novelty, BehavNeurosci., 119, 1, 145-53Lee, I. and Kesner, R. P. (2004), Encoding versus retrieval of spatial memory: double dissociation between the dentate gyrusand the perforant path inputs into CA3 in the dorsal hippocampus, Hippocampus, 14, 1, 66-76Leutgeb, J. K., Leutgeb, S., Moser, M.-B., and Moser, E. I. (2007), Pattern separation in the dentate gyrus and ca3 of thehippocampus, Science, 315, 5814, 961-966Li, X., Somogyi, P., Ylinen, A., and Buzsáki, G. (1994), The hippocampal ca3 network: an in vivo intracellular labelingstudy, J Comp Neurol., 339, 2, 181-208Lisman, J. E. (1999), Relating hippocampal circuitry to function: Recall of memory sequences by reciprocal dentateCA3interactions, Neuron, 22, 2, 233-42Lopez-Rojas, J. and Kreutz, M. R. (2016), Mature granule cells of the dentate gyrus - passive bystanders or principalperformers in hippocampal function, Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 64, 167-174Lysetskiy, M., Földy, C., and Soltesz, I. (2005), Long- and short-term plasticity at mossy fiber synapses on mossy cells in the rat dentate gyrus, Hippocampus, 15, 6, 691-6 Marr, D. (1969), A theory of cerebellar cortex, J Physiol, 202, 2, 437-470Marr, D. (1971), Simple memory: a theory for archicortex, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.Series B, Biological Sciences, 262, 841, 23-81McBain, C. J. (2008), Differential mechanisms of transmission and plasticity at mossy fiber synapses, Prog Brain Res., 169,225-240McHugh, T., Jones, M., Quinn, J., Balthasar, N., Coppari, R., Elmquist, J., et al. (2007), Dentate gyrus nmda receptorsmediate rapid pattern separation in the hippocampal network, Science, 317, 94-99 McNaughton, B. L. and Nadel, L. (1990), Hebb-Marr networks and the neurobiological representation of action in space. InGluck, M. A. and Rumelhart, D. E. (eds), Neuroscience and Connectionist Theory (Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum), pp 1-64McNaughton, B.L., Barnes, C.A., Mizomori, S.Y., Green, E.J., and Sharp, P.E. (1991). The contribution of granule cells tospatial representation in hippocampal circuits: A puzzle. In: Morrell F. (ed), Kindling and Synaptic Plasticity: The Legacy ofGraham Goddard. Boston:Springer-Verlag. pp 110-123Morris, R. G. M. (2001), Episodic-like memory in animals: psychological criteria, neural mechanisms and the value ofepisodic-like tasks to investigate animal models of neurodegenerative disease, Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci., 356,1413, 1453-1465Moser, E. I. And Moser, E. I. (2003), One-shot memory in hippocampal CA3 networks, Neuron, 38(2):147-8Myers, C. E. and Scharfman, H. E. (2009), A role for hilar cells in pattern separation in the dentate gyrus: A computationalapproach, Hippocampus, 19, 4, 321-337Myers, C. E. and Scharfman, H. E. (2011), Pattern separation in the dentate gyrus: A role for the CA3 backprojection,Hippocampus, 21, 11, 1190-215Nakashiba, T., Cushman, J. D., Pelkey, K. A., Renaudineau, S., Buhl, D. L., McHugh, T. J., et al. (2012), Young dentategranule cells mediate pattern separation, whereas old granule cells facilitate pattern completion, Cell, 149, 1, 188-20120O’Reilly, R. C. and McClelland, J. L. (1994), Hippocampal conjunctive encoding, storage, and recall: Avoiding a trade-off,Hippocampus, 4, 6, 661-82O’Reilly, R. C. and Rudy, J. W. (2001), Conjunctive representations in learning and memory: Principles of cortical andhippocampal function, Psychological Review, 108, 2, 311-345Restivo, L., Niibori, Y., Mercaldo, V., Josselyn, S. A., and Frankland, P. W. (2015), Development of adult-generated cellconnectivity with excitatory and inhibitory cell populations in the hippocampus, Journal of Neuroscience, 35, 29, 10600-12 Ribak, C. E. and Peterson, G. M. (1991), Intragranular mossy fibers in rats and gerbils form synapses with the somata andproximal dendrites of basket cells in the dentate gyrus, Hippocampus, 1, 4, 355-64 Rolls, E. (2013), The mechanisms for pattern completion and pattern separation in the hippocampus, Frontiers in SystemsNeuroscience, 7, 74Rolls, E. T. and Treves, A. (1998), Neural networks and brain function. Oxford University Press, Oxford, New YorkRömer, B., Krebs, J., Overall, R. W., Fabel, K., Babu, H., Overstreet-Wadiche, L., et al. (2011), Adult hippocampalneurogenesis and plasticity in the infrapyramidal bundle of the mossy fiber projection: I. co-regulation by activity, FrontNeurosci., 5, 107Ruediger, S., Vittori, C., Bednarek, E., Genoud, C., Strata, P., Sacchetti, B., et al. (2011), Learning-related feedforwardinhibitory connectivity growth required for memory precision, Nature, 473, 7348, 514-8Scharfman, H. E. (1991), Dentate hilar cells with dendrites in the molecular layer have lower thresholds for synapticactivation by perforant path than granule cells, J. Neurosci., 11, 6, 1660-73Scharfman, H. E. (1994), Evidence from simultaneous intracellular recordings in rat hippocampal slices that area CA3pyramidal cells innervate dentate hilar mossy cells, J. Neurophysiol., 72, 2167-80Scharfman, H. E., (1995), Electrophysiological evidence that dentate hilar mossy cells are excitatory and innervate bothgranule cells and interneurons, J Neurophysiol, 74, 1, 179-94Scharfman, H. E. (2007), The CA3 “backprojection” to the dentate gyrus, Prog Brain Res., 163, 627-37Scharfman, H. E. (2016), The enigmatic mossy cell of the dentate gyrus, Nat Rev Neurosci., 17, 9, 562-575Scharfman, H., Sollas, A., Smith, K., Jackson, M., and Goodman, J. (2002), Structural and functional asymmetry in thenormal and epileptic rat dentate gyrus, J Comp Neurol., 454, 4, 424-39Scoville, W. B. and Milner, B. (1957), Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions, Journal of Neurology,Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 20, 1, 11-21Segal, S.K., Stark, S.M., Kattan, D., Stark, C.E., and Yassa, M.A. (2012), Norepinephrine-mediated emotional arousalfacilitates subsequent pattern separation, Neurobiol Learn Mem., 97, 4, 465-9Senzai, Y. and Buzsáki, G. (2017), Physiological properties and behavioral correlates of hippocampal granule cells andmossy cells, Neuron, 93, 3, 691-704Seress, L. and Pokorny, J. (1981), Structure of the granular layer of the rat dentate gyrus. a light microscopic and golgistudy, J Anat, 133, Pt 2, 181-95Toni, N., Laplagne, D., Zhao, C., Lombardi, G., Ribak, C., Gage, F., et al. (2008), Neurons born in the adult dentate gyrusform functional synapses with target cells, Nat Neurosci., 11, 8, 901-7Treves, A. and Rolls, E. T. (1994), Computational analysis of the role of the hippocampus in memory, Hippocampus, 4, 3,374-391Treves, A., Tashiro, A., Witter, M., and Moser, E. (2008), What is the mammalian dentate gyrus good for?, Neuroscience,154, 4, 1155-72Tulving, E. (1972), Episodic and semantic memory. In Tulving E. and Donaldson W. (eds) Organization of Memory. NewYork: Academic Press, pp 382-402Vago, D. and Kesner, R. (2008), Disruption of the direct perforant path input to the ca1 subregion of the dorsal hippocampusinterferes with spatial working memory and novelty detection, Behav Brain Res., 189, 2, 273-83Weisz, V. I. and Argibay, P. F. (2009), A putative role for neurogenesis in neurocomputational terms: Inferences from ahippocampal model, Cognition, 112, 2, 229-240West, M., Slomianka, L., and Gundersen, H. (1991), Unbiased stereological estimation of the total number of neurons in thesubdivisions of the rat hippocampus using the optical fractionator, Anat Rec., 231, 4, 482-9721Wills, T., Lever, C., Cacucci, F., Burgess, N., and O’Keefe, J. (2005), Attractor dynamics in the hippocampal representationof the local environment, Science, 308, 5723, 873-6Willshaw, D. J., Buneman, O. P., and Longuet-Higgins, H. C. (1969), Non-holographic associative memory, Nature, 222,5197, 960-962Wiskott, L., Rasch, M., and Kempermann, G. (2006), A functional hypothesis for adult hippocampal neurogenesis:Avoidance of catastrophic interference in the dentate gyrus, Hippocampus, 16, 3, 329-43Witter, M. P. (2010), Connectivity of the hippocampus. In Cutsuridis, V., Graham, B. P., Cobb, S., and Vida, I. (eds)Hippocampal Microcircuits: A Computational Modelers Resource Book. New York, NY: Springer, pp 5-26Wittner, L., Henze, D.A., Záborszky, L., and Buzsáki, G. (2006), Hippocampal CA3 pyramidal cells selectively innervateaspiny interneurons., Eur J Neurosci., 24, 5, 1286-98Yassa, M. A. and Stark, C. E. L. (2011), Pattern separation in the hippocampus, Trends Neurosci., 34, 10, 515-25Yu, E., Dengler, C., Frausto, S., Putt, M., Yue, C., Takano, H., et al. (2013), Protracted postnatal development of sparse,specific dentate granule cell activation in the mouse hippocampus, J Neurosci., 33, 7, 2947-60APPENDIX - IMPLEMENTATIONAL DETAILSOur model includes networks for the DG and CA3 regions of the hippocampus (Fig. 2). The cell numbers are scaled downto approximately 1/1000 the size of the rat hippocampus (West et al., 1991; Witter, 2010): 1000 PPGC, 120 HGC and 120MC in the DG; 300 PPCA3 and 50 HCA3 in CA3; and external inputs are provided by 200 neurons in the EC. Thesimulated neurons are simple points with continuous firing rates. The postsynaptic activity is computed as a function of theneuron’s membrane potential which evolves according to the sum of all excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs the neuronreceives. The computations proceed in discrete time steps during which the activity of a homogeneous population ofneurons is updated synchronously.The DG NetworkAll inputs from the EC cells to a PPGCi are summed up to a membrane potential, Vi:Vi(t)=∑jWijECj(t)−IPPGCwhere ECj is the activity of the jth EC cell; Wij refers to the synaptic weights between EC and PPGC; IPPGC is the amount oftonic inhibition in the DG which has been held constant at 0.75. At the beginning of each simulation run, Wij are initializedas random values drawn from a normal distribution with a mean of 1 and a standard deviation of 0.05 and are furthernormalized onto each PPGC.Within each cluster, PPGC compete among themselves and only those receiving maximal excitation are driven to fire. Thefiring rate is given by:PPGCi(t)={tanh(σVi(t)),ifVi(t)=argmaxk∈C(Vk(t))0,otherwisewith σ is a constant defining the slope of the hyperbolic function and set to 0.1 for all PPGC, k is the index that labels PPGCbelonging to the same cluster C as PPGCi.In the hilus, the membrane potential of a MCi depends upon its two main inputs. The influence of PPGC input is computedin a way similar to that described for associative memories with binary neurons (Willshaw et al., 1969; Knoblauch et al.,2010):Vi(PPGC)(t)={Vi=∑jWijPPGCj(t),ifVi≥∑jPPGCj(t)0,otherwise The weights of synapses that connect PPGC and MC are initially set to zero, and updated during learning according to the“clipped” Hebbian learning (Willshaw et al., 1969; Knoblauch et al., 2010), which means that Wij is changed from 0 to 122when both presynaptic and postsynaptic cells are simultaneously active (MCi>0 and PPGCj>0) while further co-activationsdo not induce further changes.The influence of CA3 backprojection on MC membrane potential is approximated by the summed activity of the wholepopulation of PPCA3:Vi(PPCA3)(t)=G(tanh(σ∑jWijPPCA3j(t)))Here we assume a fully connected projection from PPCA3 to MC with all synaptic weights, Wij, are set to 1; σ is set to 0.1;and G(.) is a dual-thresholding function which implicitly defines the influence of PPCA3 on MC. Specifically, G(Vi) causesone of the high-threshold mossy cells, MCh, to be active if Vi > θh; or activates one of the low-threshold mossy cell, MCl, ifθl < Vi ≤ θh; otherwise, CA3 backprojection has no influence on MC. This function also assigns 1/0 binary states to free vs.already recruited MC to ensure that a MC would be recruited only if it is not part of other previously-established memorytraces. The default values for MC thresholds, θl and θh, are set to 0.1 and 0.5, respectively.The firing rate of a MCi is then given by:MCi(t)=tanh(σ(Vi(PPGC)(t)+Vi(PPCA3)(t)))with σ is set to 10. The synaptic weights between MC and HGC are set to 1 and HGC are assumed to show equal responsesas their presynaptic partners ( HGCi(t) = MCi(t) ).The CA3 NetworkThe activity of PPCA3 cells is driven by multiple excitatory and inhibitory inputs. During learning, PPGC mossy fiberinputs function as detonators for their PPCA3 targets provided that the latter are not under active inhibition fromHGC/HCA3. The firing rate of a PPCA3i is given by:PPCA3i(t)={tanh(∑jWijPPGCj(t)),ifIi=00,∧otherwise WithIi=∑jQijHGCj(t)+∑jZijHCA3j(t)Here, Wij refers to the synaptic weights of mossy fibers which are all equal to 1; Ii refers to the summed inhibitory actionthat HGC and HCA3 might trigger onto PPCA3; all the weights of inhibitory synapses between HGC and PPCA3, Qij, areinitiated at 1, while the weights of inhibitory synapses between HCA3 and PPCA3, Zij, are all initiated and maintained at 1.Learning occurs in CA3 by modifying the synaptic weights of EC-PPCA3 and PPCA3-PPCA3 connections according toclipped Hebbian learning and by setting the synaptic weights of the inhibitory connections between co-active HGC andPPCA3 cells to zero.During recall, PPGC inputs are disabled. PPCA3 receive excitatory drives from the perforant path and recurrent projections,but may also undergo strong inhibition from local interneurons; HCA3 are only responsive to drive from HGC:PPCA3i(t)={tanh(σ(∑jWijPPECj(t)+∑kWikRCPPCA3k(t−1)−IPPCA3(t))),ifIi=0 0,∧otherwisewithIPPCA3=μ(∑jECj(t)+∑kPPCA3k(t−1))23andHCA3i(t)=HGCi(t)Again, Ii refers to the amount of inhibition arising from HGC/HCA3 on PPCA3i; WijPP and WikRC are respectivelythe synaptic weights of EC-PPCA3 and PPCA3-PPCA3 connections; IPPCA3 is the amount of inhibition that depends onincoming activity from the EC and CA3 itself; μ is a constant which has been set to 0.2. The activity of PPCA3 is computedrepeatedly until the network settles into a steady state or until a maximum of 10 iterations is reached.FiguresFig. 1 A: Schematic transverse section through the rodent hippocampus. Three of the major hippocampal subregions areshown: the dentate gyrus (DG), CA3 with its CA3a,b and CA3c subdivisions, and CA1. Cortical inputs reach thehippocampus via the perforant path projections from the entorhinal cortex (EC). The perforant path axons of EC cellsterminate on distal dendrites of dentate granule cells (GC), forming the first stage in the trisynaptic hippocampal loop. In thesecond stage, mossy fiber axons of GC makes giant boutons that innervate thorny excrescences of CA3 pyramidal cells andsignificantly more filopodial contacts and small en passant boutons that innervate CA3 interneurons (Not shown in thefigure; Acsàdy et al., 1998). Schaffer collateral axons of CA3 pyramidal cells then project to distal dendrites of CA1pyramidal cells, which project back to the EC (both directly and indirectly via the subiculum), closing the loop. In additionto innervating the DG, perforant path axons form monosynaptic excitatory contacts with CA3 and CA1 cells. There are alsomultiple recurrent and feedback excitatory pathways. Most prominent are strong recurrent collaterals within CA3, especiallyin CA3a,b. Some CA3 pyramidal cells also tend to project back to the DG, especially those located in ventral CA3c(Ishizuka et al., 1990; Li et al., 1994), where they form synaptic contacts with non-principal dentate cells, including hilarglutamatergic mossy cells (MC) and GABAergic interneurons (Scharfman, 2007). Besides, hilar cells receive highlyconvergent inputs from GC and form multiple excitatory and inhibitory feedback loops through the axons they project backto GC and local interneurons (Buckmaster et al., 1996; Larimer and Strowbridge, 2008). B: Local circuitry of the DG. Thegranule cells (GC) have their somata in the granule cell layer (GCL), their dendrites arborize through the inner, middle andouter thirds of the molecular layer (IML, MML and OML), and their axons widely ramify within the hilus. The perforantpath axons of EC cells form synapses with GC dentrites in the MML and OML, while MC axons typically arborizeipsilateral and contralateral to their cell body and terminate on GC dendrites in the IML (Scharfman, 2016). MC receivedirect input from GC mossy fibers, and from CA3 pyramidal neurons that extent their axon collaterals back into the hilus(Ishizuka et al., 1990; Scharfman, 1994). The interneurons in the DG are diverse: IN represents perisomatic-targetinginterneurons, such as basket cells and chandelier cells, with dendrites spanning all the three layers and axons primarilylocated in the GCL; MOPP (molecular layer perforant path-associated cell) are GABAergic cells with both dendritic andaxonal trees being largely limited to MML and OML; HIPP (hilar perforant path-associated cell) are hilar cells with theirdendrites being limited to the hilus and their axons ascending to MML and OML; HIN represents other GABAergic hilarinterneurons (Freund and Buzsáki, 1996). MC selectively innervate hilar interneurons that also preferentially target MC(Larimer and Strowbridge, 2008). It is likely that the main targets of MC are aspiny interneurons which are alsopreferentially innervated by CA3 recurrent collaterals (Buckmaster et al., 1996; Wittner et al., 2006).Fig. 2 Schematic of the proposed model of the DG-CA3 network. The model defines three distinct, yet intertwined, circuitsto mediate different pattern separation mechanisms with increasing degrees of robustness against interference. 1) Thesparsification circuit is similar to standard models of the DG-CA3 network. The EC input diverges onto a largesubpopulation of granule cells, PPGC, which further increase the sparseness of DG representations through theircompetitive interactions mediated by local somatic or axo-axonic feedback GABAergic interneurons. The activity of PPGCreaches a large subpopulation of CA3 pyramidal cells, PPCA3, via mossy fibers, and forces new representations on theseCA3 cells. 2) The inhibition circuit involves additional recurrent excitatory feedback from PPGC, through a subset of mossycells (MCl), to a smaller subpopulation of granule cells, HGC, that mediate learning-dependent inhibition on PPCA3. 3) Theorthogonalization circuit extends the sparsification circuitry by recurrent excitatory feedback from PPGC, through a subsetof mossy cells (MCh), to a smaller subpopulation of granule cells, HGC, that drive strong excitation on a smallsubpopulation of CA3 pyramidal cells, HCA3, which, in turn, drive strong inhibition on PPCA3. The circuit selection isassociated with the integration of intrinsic and extrinsic signals which converge to the hilus, directly or indirectly fromPPCA3, from the septum, and other neuromodulatory systems; as a result, either MCl or MCh or none of them, can beactivated during learning depending the required level of pattern separation. The architecture of the model in its most basicform is drawn in black (the sparsification circuit). How this basic architecture is extended to include the inhibition and24orthogonalization circuits is indicated, respectively, by green- and blue-colored connections. Stable, non-modifiablesynaptic connections in the model are shown as solid lines, while plastic synaptic connections are shown as solid linesinterrupted by two slanted bars. Excitatory projections are indicated by arrows and inhibitory projections by linesterminating in a vertical bar. Fig. 3 A: Pattern separation in the basic model (S) and the proposed model (S-I-O) in the DG and CA3 networks. Thediagonal line depicts equal similarities at the input and at the output; pattern separation occurs if similarity between theoutput patterns falls below the line and the greater the distance below the line, the greater the effect of pattern separation. B:The number of HGC recruited by the inhibition circuit (I) and the number of HGC/HCA3 recruited by the orthogonalizationcircuit (O) in the S-I-O model. C and D: The differential contributions of inhibition and orthogonalization circuits using theS-I and S-O models under the default setting of MC thresholds (θl=0.1 and θh=0.5). The results of the S model from A arereplotted here for ease of comparison. E: The number of HGC recruited by the inhibition circuit. F: The number ofHGC/HCA3 recruited by the orthogonalization circuit.Fig. 4 A: The individual contributions of the inhibition (I) and orthogonalization (O) circuits using the S-I and S-O models.In order to enable the activation of these circuits following any potential risk of interference, MC thresholds were set to θl=0and θh=1 in the S-I model, while they were set to θl=θh=0 in the S-O model. B: The number of HGC recruited by theinhibition circuit. C: The number of HGC/HCA3 recruited by the orthogonalization circuit.Fig. 5 A: Pattern separation in the S-I model after one presentation (1P) of the paired patterns for learning purpose (resultsreplotted from Fig. 4A), and after two presentations (2P) of the patterns, using a matching threshold υm of 0.7 and 0.95. B:The total number of HGC recruited by the inhibition circuit during one (1P) and two (2P) learning trials using υm=0.7. C:The total number of HGC recruited by the inhibition circuit during one (1P) and two (2P) learning trials using υm=0.95. Fig. 6 Effect of the number of stored patterns on retrieval performance measured as the average similarity between thestored and retrieved patterns. The gray-filled area shows model results obtained with the number of HGC and/or HCA3exceeding the values specified as default in the architecture of the present model (HGC=120 and HCA3=50). A:Performance of the S model vs. the S-I-O model with MC thresholds set to default (θl=.1 and θh=.5) and increased values(θl=.3 and θh=.9). B: The number of HGC recruited by the inhibition circuit (I) and the number of HGC/HCA3 recruited bythe orthogonalization circuit (O). C: Comparison of performance of the S-O model for different values of θh. D: The numberof HGC/HCA3 recruited by the orthogonalization circuit in the S-O model. E: Comparison of performance of the S-I modelfor different values of θl and θh. F: The number of HGC recruited by the inhibitory circuit in the S-I model. The results ofthe S model taken from A are replotted in C and E for ease of comparison. Fig. 7 Model results from the simulation of the spatial pattern separation task of Gilbert et al. (2001). A: The averagesimilarity between CA3 output responses to different pairs of input patterns. The model with the DG activated (control)showed markedly reduced similarity in CA3 compared with similarity that existed in the input patterns. With the DGinactivated (lesion), CA3 responses were highly correlated for pairs that were similar or highly similar at the input. B: TheS-I-O model tended to rely on inhibition for pairs with low input similarities but more on orthogonalization for pairs withhigher similarities at the input. C: Retrieval performance in terms of the similarity between stored and recalled patterns.Without the DG, the capacity of the model to retrieve stored patterns got progressively worse as the input similarity becamehigher.Fig. 8 The results obtained by the S-I-O model in the first scenario used in the simulations of the morphing experiment ofLeutgeb et al. (2007). Similarity of DG/CA3 population responses to morphing when learning was disabled on morphedpatterns (Patterns 2 to 6). DG exhibited clear separation for small morphs while CA3 responses were clearly attracted toeither of the two previously stored representations of Pattern 1 or 7. Pattern 4 caused retrieval of a mixture of the twopreviously stored representations in CA3. Fig. 9 Model results obtained in two different novelty-based learning scenarios used in the simulations of the morphingexperiment of Leutgeb et al. (2007). A: In the S model, morphing induced a gradual decrease in the similarity of CA3population responses with υm=0.7, but CA3 pattern separation decreased by increasing υm to 0.95. B: In the S-I-O model,morphing also induced a gradual decrease in the similarity of CA3 population responses with υm=0.7, but CA3 patternseparation increased by increasing υm to 0.95. C: With a low threshold, υm=0.7, sparsification/inhibition based mechanismswere mostly used to learn a new CA3 representation for Pattern 4. D: With a high threshold, υm=0.95, learning occurredmore frequently and orthogonalization/inhibition based mechanisms tended to dominate learning of small morphs.Fig. 1

Fig. 2

Fig 3

Fig 4 

Fig 5

Fig 6 

Fig 7 

 
Fig. 8

Fig. 9

