A behavioral framework for a systemic view of brain
modeling
Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre. A behavioral framework for a systemic view of brain modeling. 2015.
01246653￿

￿hal-

HAL Id: hal-01246653

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01246653

Preprint submitted on 18 Dec 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

A behavioral framework for a systemic view of brain modeling

Frédéric Alexandre1

1Inria, Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research Centre
1Labri, UMR 5800, CNRS, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP
1IMN, UMR 5293, CNRS, Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases

1

Introduction

As stated by the French biologist and physician
Henri Laborit (Laborit, 1976), the motivation of living
beings is ... being, i.e. maintaining their organic struc-
ture. Whereas this statement is obvious for primitive
animals, it is too often neglected when studying high le-
vel cognitive functions, particularly in humans. Most of
the time in computational neuroscience, such cognitive
functions are associated to speciﬁc regions of the cor-
tex with no references to the bodily dimension or even
to subcortical structures. Their characteristics are des-
cribed as resulting from purely cortical dynamics, with
no references to motivational or emotional groundings.
Some authors and paradigmatic approaches have stres-
sed the limitations of such corticocentric views, com-
pared with a myopia (Parvizi, 2009), minimizing the
essential role of subcortical structures. The domain of
embodied Artiﬁcial Intelligence has shown through ro-
botic experiments (Pfeifer, Bongard, & Grand, 2007)
that complex behaviors may result from elementary
loops between sensors and actuators, exploiting the
properties of the body instead of a complex represen-
tation of information. It is for example proposed in
(Taouali, Goﬀart, Alexandre, & Rougier, 2015) that
the non homogeneous distribution of sensors in the re-
tina can explain some visual target selection principles
in a more parsimonious way than cortical mechanisms.
More fundamentally and more anchored in biology,
enactivism, the theory of enaction (Varela, Thompson,
& Rosch, 1991), stresses principles like autonomy and
ecological meaning of the behavior. In this theory, au-
tonomous behavior is a central characteristic and is
considered at diﬀerent time scales. Fundamentally, a
living being must choose on its own and at each mo-
ment the most adapted behavior and can only rely
on previous learning (ontogeny) and on pre-established
abilities (phylogeny). Ecological meaning refers to the
motivational and emotional bases of behavior that have

to be taken into account. Cats chase mice because they
have such motivations, needs and goals — because they
are cats.

In spite of their important role to deﬁne needs of
the body and goals to be reached, the motivational
and emotional dimensions of behavior are little stu-
died in computational neuroscience and in cognitive
science. Building on interoceptive information like vis-
ceral signals but also on somatosensory information
(pain, pleasure, temperature), the insular cortex is re-
ported to play a central role in deﬁning motivations of
the body to act, like feeding, breeding, preserving the
integrity of the body (A. Craig, 2009). Biologically si-
gniﬁcant events important for survival signaled by such
interoceptive signals but also by sensory information
(e.g. related to the perception of a predator or of so-
cial signals) can be associated by learning with other
neutral events that will elicit emotions useful to antici-
pate the former ones and to detect goals to be pursued
or avoided. (Gros, 2010) suggests a speciﬁc role of in-
formation of reduced complexity for emotions that can
become conscious feelings, also described as mental ex-
periences of body states (Damasio & Carvalho, 2013).

Such a body of principles renders humans closer from
animals. It also underlines the strong links between
the brain, the body and the environment and, within
the brain, is a strong motivation to consider loops ins-
tead of cortical regions in isolation and to consider the
multiple learning mechanisms at work in these loops.
At the functional level, this is also a plea for deﬁning
a global cognitive architecture in which any cognitive
operation in consideration should be delineated. Deci-
sion making, planning, selective attention or percep-
tual identiﬁcation shouldn’t be studied, and models of
the corresponding cerebral circuitry shouldn’t be ela-
borated, without a reference to global plans relating
cognition and the brain, seen as a whole and in rela-
tion to the body and the environment. Else, the risk

1

is to just study mechanisms apart from the rationale
for their existence and consequently to forget some of
their fundamental characteristics and resources.

In agreement with these considerations, we present
here in a systemic view a general framework of brain
modeling that has been elaborated in our team as a
basis for several modeling studies of the brain, of lear-
ning mechanisms and of cognitive operations. It is also
intended, for future speciﬁc studies of brain-inspired
cognitive mechanisms, to serve as an outline in which
each of these studies should be placed, for a better un-
derstanding of its contribution in general cognition and
for consistency in this systemic view of cognition that
we aﬃrm here to be essential. This view is kept simple
not only because of the reduced size of this paper but
also because it is intended not to give a very detailed
description of all the underlying phenomena (beyond
our knowledge) but to set their main principles.

2 Three worlds to conciliate

The brain is facing three complex and dynamic
worlds, on each of which it can sense information and
it can act, possibly resulting on modiﬁcations in that
and other worlds. We call these worlds the external en-
vironment, the extended body and the internal body.
The external environment corresponds to the ex-
ternal world, including objects subject to the laws of
physics and beings subject to the laws of nature, possi-
bly including intentionality. These agents exist in space
and time and can be sensed by external sensors (i.e.
seen, heared, touched, tasted or smelt), deﬁning exte-
roception.

The extended body considers the body as an agent
in the external environment, in which it may act. The
extended body is composed of parts (e.g. limbs, head)
carrying the external sensors. Their positions in space
can be sensed by proprioception and can be modiﬁed
by elementary actions and integrated motor programs
(e.g. walking, grasping, speaking).

The internal body refers to all the machinery that
makes the body work internally at the visceral, chemi-
cal, hormonal levels, i.e. eat, drink, breath, digest, etc.
This deﬁnes the fundamental needs of a being, depen-
ding on internal states that can be sensed by interocep-
tion. Homeostatic mechanisms and other internal and
external actions can modify these states.

As sketched in ﬁgure 1, the brain has consequently
exteroceptive, proprioceptive and interoceptive sensors
to get information about these worlds and their inner
dynamics. It can act on them through a series of pro-

cesses that we will call actions at large. These actions
can be voluntary or involuntary and be applied to the
extended or internal body, respectively corresponding
to motions of parts of the body with skeletal muscles
(e.g. speaking or blinking) and to the activation of en-
docrine or exocrine glands (e.g. releasing an hormone
or crying), of smooth muscles and of the heart. Im-
pacts of these actions in the three worlds can also be
perceived by the sensors.

For both motor and sensory aspects, the central ner-
vous system (including the brain) is connected to these
worlds by the peripheral nervous system, including a
somatic part (for exteroception and proprioception and
for external actions) and a visceral part (also known as
autonomic nervous system, for interoception and in-
ternal actions). The brain can be interpreted as an in-
formation processing system receiving signals from the
three worlds and triggering actions impacting them.
The role of the brain can be discussed with regard to
the ways the signals are processed (building internal
representations, convenient for subsequent processing)
and the actions triggered.

Signals that are received can be used to trigger di-
rectly actions, based on their intrisic value or on their
capacity to activate internal representations. They can
also be used to modify internal representations or to
create new ones, following several learning processes
that will be described in the next sections. These in-
ternal representations correspond to diﬀerent kinds of
memories that might also participate to triggering ac-
tions at various moments. As we will also discuss below,
the characteristics of these memories, directly linked to
the information ﬂows feeding them and the criteria go-
verning the corresponding learning rules, will have a
strong inﬂuence of the kind of information that will be
represented in the brain and available for action selec-
tion.

In summary the processes for the transduction of
signals into actions and for the elaboration of internal
representations of information are based on the signals
received from the three worlds, on the current state of
the memories and on the architecture of the cerebral
structures.

Before describing more technically these processes, it
is fundamental to remind that they have been selected
in an evolutionary scheme, particularly to enable living
beings to maintain their structure, to optimize survival
and reproduction. This sets a special emphasis on the
internal body world that has been designed and com-
plexiﬁed by evolution to represent special body states
indicating critical situations and giving speciﬁc incen-
tives for that aim. Particularly, the autonomic nervous

2

Figure 1 – In an enactive view of cognition, the brain is not seen in isolation but in systemic inter-relation
with the external environment and with internal states. This leads to the speciﬁcation of two facets of the
body. The extended body interacts with the external environment through proprioception and exteroception
and through external actions. The internal body feels internal states by interoception and can trigger internal
actions. Altogether, this deﬁnes the sensory and motor information ﬂows of a brain+body system, acting and
learning in the external environment to satisfy some fundamental needs, expressed as internal states.

3

system is divided in two parts, the parasympathetic
system responsible for the feed and breed activities and
the sympathetic system for the ﬁght or ﬂight activi-
ties. In a simplistic view, this can be categorized in a
dichotomic way with positive (pleasant) situations and
incentives to exploit them for the nourishment and the
reproduction of the body, opposed to negative (unplea-
sant or painful) situations and incentives to get rid of
them for the integrity of the body. As we will discuss
later, though partly overlapping, it would be too simple
to directly associate this dichotomy to rewards and pu-
nishments, since for example a lower punishment than
expected can be seen as pleasant. This can be more ni-
cely integrated in a two opponent-process system with
mutual inhibition between two classes with opposite
properties, acting against a baseline (Dickinson & Bal-
leine, 2002).

3 Pavlovian and instrumental

conditioning

Considering the brain, as sketched in ﬁgure 1, as
a system integrating diﬀerent kinds of sensations to
decide for diﬀerent kinds of actions, several mecha-
nisms of increasing complexity have been aggregated
to this system along evolution. A ﬁrst set of mecha-
nisms directly associated to emotional learning is rela-
ted to pavlovian (or respondent) conditioning (Balleine
& Killcross, 2006). Some biologically signiﬁcant stimuli
also called unconditional stimuli US (e.g. a predator or
some food) can be automatically identiﬁed (without
learning) and trigger unconditional responses UR (e.g.
freezing or salivation). Pavlovian conditioning corres-
ponds to learn that some initially neutral conditional
stimuli CS (e.g. a tone or a light) announce the arrival
of US. Subsequently, the occurence of CS can generate
two phases of behavior. In the preparatory phase, the
CS is associated to motivational properties of the US
and to its valence (aversive or appetitive) and triggers
non speciﬁc responses like arousal, heart rate increase
and approach. In the consummatory phase, the CS is
associated to the sensory properties of the US and trig-
gers speciﬁc responses like chewing and blinking.

At this stage, it can be interpreted that pavlovian
learning is a way to anticipate, upon CS arrival, the
negative or positive characteristics of the US and to
prepare the body to this inevitable event. In the pav-
lovian scheme, responses are stereotyped (also called
pavlovian reﬂexes) and are consequences of the learned
association. Several mechanisms have been described,
inserting actions in the pavlovian process (Balleine &

Killcross, 2006). In autoshaping, an action can be trig-
gered to more easily get a CS. In pavlovian instrumen-
tal transfer (PIT), animals exposed to a CS associated
to a US trigger more frequently the action that was
learned to yield that US.

To more ﬂexibly insert actions in the behavioral pro-
cess, in another learning scheme called instrumental (or
operant) conditioning, the learned association is bet-
ween an action and the outcome observed to be the
consequence of the action. An action will be triggered
more (resp. less) frequently when observed to lead to
a positive (resp. negative) consequence. Alternatively,
an action can be triggered more frequently if it leads to
the avoidance or removal of a negative stimulus, giving
also here a motivation to act. The two opponent pro-
cess system mentioned above is a good basis to consi-
der these negative cases where, at the end, no rein-
forcement is given : the absence of negative outcome
can be considered as a positive outcome, on which to
build learning with so called conditioned inhibitors. It
has also been associated to the representation of safety
(Genud-Gabai, Klavir, & Paz, 2013).

Instrumental conditioning can be performed under
the control (or conditional to) stimuli also called oc-
casion setters, that can become conditioned reinforcers
(Cardinal, Parkinson, Hall, & Everitt, 2002), leading
to chaining in behavioral goal-directed sequences to-
ward primary reinforcers. These associations can be
restricted to habits through extensive learning, where
the conditional stimuli directly elicit actions without
references to the outcomes to be obtained.

In summary, it has been argued here that the beha-
vior is basically organized around motivations to act
imprinted in the nervous system. We have mainly evo-
ked extrinsic motivations, to get a desired outcome sa-
tisfying fundamental needs. This includes integrity of
the body, seen as a positive motivation in the frame-
work of the two opponent process system. With the
elaboration of more complex internal representations
that will be described below, expressing intrinsic moti-
vations (Oudeyer, Kaplan, & Hafner, 2007) like curio-
sity or attention toward novelty, related to more abs-
tract needs of exploration of a complex world and of
monitoring of internal activity, will be made possible.
Beyond the automatic triggering of stereotyped be-
haviors associated to motivations, we have also evoked
two fundamental learning processes that elaborate on
them. Pavlovian conditioning learns CS that anticipate
the US and instrumental conditioning learns to select
actions that best exploit them. These learnings are not
easy because they are to be performed in three mu-
tually dependent, changing and dynamic worlds, the

4

external environment and the extended and internal
body. Through evolution, a task of the nervous system
has been to learn to build more and more complex and
adapted representations of these worlds, as we report
in the next section.

4 Encoding and representation of

information

In this section, we propose a general framework of in-
formation representation in the brain and explain how
this is associated to questions to be addressed in more
and more complex ways along three main evolutionary
steps and some corresponding learning paradigms.

4.1 Four questions to be addressed

We have explained above that one important task
of the brain is to explore three diﬀerent worlds and
to learn their contingencies. Overall, the goal is to get
information about ’objects’ in these worlds and about
ways to act on them. We sketch these pieces of informa-
tion as answers to four fundamental questions : what,
why, where and how.

The why and what questions are useful to relate
the internal body and external environment. The what
question is useful to encode a CS and its emotional im-
pact. The CS can be seen as the current goal of the
behavior (for example a bottle of water). It is conse-
quently important to encode its physical characteristics
(shape, color) to be associated to its emotional value
(like, dislike). Several regions of the posterior ventral
cortex have been reported to be selectively responsive
to such physical characteristics (Rousselet, Thorpe, &
Fabre-Thorpe, 2004). The why question corresponds to
the characteristics of the motivational impact on the
body and is useful to encode the value of the US or the
bodily cost of an action to get it. Consider for example
the level of water deprivation or the intensity of a pain.
Such information is represented in the posterior insular
cortex (A. Craig, 2009). It can motivate the behavior,
explaining ’why’ we act (for which purpose) and why
we accept to spend our energy.

The where and how questions relate the external
body and the external environment. Answering the
where question provides information about the position
of an ’object’ and particularly with regard to (some
parts of) the body. The how question refers to the need
to learn how objects can be modiﬁed (e.g. moved, ma-
nipulated) by the action of some body parts. The pos-
terior dorsal cortex has been reported to be involved in

both functions (Milner & Goodale, 1995), respectively
in its superior and inferior parts.

These questions give the main ingredients of a simple
behavior : We describe the goal of our action (what
are its characteristics), explain why it is appropriate
for our current motivation and localize it (where) for
consumption (how). But of course, in the real world,
things are not so easy. Several motivations and goals
can be in competition. Their characteristics can be dif-
ﬁcult to extract. Variable delays can exist between the
main ingredients of the behavior (the US, CS and ac-
tions) and some abstract reasoning can be needed (the
bottle of water is in the fridge and I have to ﬁnd the
kitchen beforehand). All these elements correspond to
increasingly complex behaviors, made possible along
evolution, as we now describe.

4.2 Elementary association to actions

Before describing how integrated behaviors can asso-
ciate answers to the four questions to eﬃciently satisfy
the needs, it must be underlined that in addition to
regions of the posterior cortex that have been mentio-
ned above as elaborating an internal representation in
reference to these questions, key subcortical regions,
existing in primitive animals without a cortex, can be
associated to them, directly associating actions to si-
milar (though more rough) representations of sensory
information.

What - The amygdala : The amygdala is a set of
structures with sensory and motor aspects, instead of
an homogenous system (Swanson & Petrovich, 1998).
Among its nuclei (LeDoux, 2007), the lateral nucleus
receives a wide spectrum of sensory inputs from the
thalamus and the cortex and is generally reported as
the place for storing CS-US associations. The central
nucleus of the amygdala (CeA) is the main output re-
gion for the expression of innate emotional responses
and related physiological responses, particularly in re-
lation to the periaqueductal gray (PAG) and the lateral
hypothalamus. Another major nucleus is the basal nu-
cleus, particularly in charge of information exchange
with higher level structures like the prefrontal cortex
and the hippocampus (Carrere & Alexandre, 2015).
Neurons in this nucleus encode a variety of information
for aversive and appetitive stimuli, related to the sen-
sory nature of the US, to conditioned inhibitors and, for
instrumental conditioning, related to conditioned rein-
forcers (Belova, Paton, Morrison, & Salzman, 2007).
It also encodes the level of arousal, ambiguity and un-
predictibility of information (Pessoa & Adolphs, 2010).

5

Altogether, the lateral and basal nuclei, also called the
basolateral complex (BLA), can consequently be consi-
dered as a primitive place for representing the valence
and the value of emotional stimuli and a relay for more
elaborated processing in the cortex, ventral striatum
and hippocampus, in direct association with the central
nucleus CeA responsible for the pavlovian response and
also involved in more elaborated emotional responses
(Cardinal et al., 2002).

Why - The lateral hypothalamus : The lateral
hypothalamus contains nuclei evaluating needs of the
organism and responsive to appetitive US, and nuclei
promoting actions related to digestive functions, blood
pressure and other visceral functions (A. D. Craig,
2003). In the framework of the two opponent process
system, it is also strongly linked to the PAG for pain
control. Similarly, on the aversive side, the PAG also
encodes corresponding US and mediates defensive res-
ponses (Bandler & Shipley, 1994). Both structures are
consequently reported as low-level homeostatic centres
and are also involved in preparation of the sensory in-
puts to the insula and in the expression of more elabo-
rated motivational behaviors (Cardinal et al., 2002).

Where - The superior colliculus : The superior
colliculus (also called the tectum in primitive animals)
is a structure mainly studied for its involvement in
eyes movement and gaze orientation (Lee, Rohrer, &
Sparks, 1988). It is composed of several layers, some
receiving mainly visual information from many regions
in the brain, including directly from the retina. The
sensory layers are topographic maps of the surrounding
environment and are in direct association with deeper
motor layers for eye movements towards the place elec-
ted by competition in the sensory layer (Taouali et al.,
2015). It has been remarked that this structure can
also perform direct sensorimotor associations for orien-
tation of the whole body for tracking novel stimuli,
for defensive movements and ﬂight in case of a danger
(Dean, Redgrave, & Westby, 1989). For more complex
oculomotor behavior, the superior colliculus remains
an essential stage between the retina and the poste-
rior dorsal cortex and the frontal eye ﬁeld (Sommer &
Wurtz, 2004) in the frontal cortex.

How - The cerebellum : The cerebellum is a cere-
bral structure known for its role in sensorimotor control
(Manto et al., 2012). Its granular cells are sensory in-
puts arranged in somatotopy and receiving most kinds
of sensory information including from proprioception.

They are directly associated with purkinje cells pro-
jecting to all output structures responsible for motor
control, from movement execution to planning. Parti-
cularly, these circuits have been shown to be involved
in limb movements, manipulation, speech, both for di-
rect automatic movements (postural adjustment, balis-
tic movements, conditioned reﬂexes) and for the control
of voluntary movement and even more abstract cogni-
tive functions, through higher level centres (Middleton
& Strick, 2000).

In summary and in accordance with an enactive view
of cognition, it is important to consider why the beha-
vior is triggered, toward what goal, where it is situated
and how it can be accessed. Each of these questions
can be tackled independently by a simple sensorimo-
tor association and we have reported here evidences
that for each question one cerebral structure is parti-
cularly involved in elaborating such an association. We
have also indicated that, in each case, other higher le-
vel structures can build more complex relations on the
association, in a classical framework of imbricated sen-
sorimotor loops (Guillery, 2005), convenient both for
incremental learning and for responding at anytime.
Before bringing more information about other levels of
imbrication, we ﬁrst evoke another problem, related to
a need of consistency between the selection of answers
to these questions.

5 Selection of action

Obviously, to display an adapted behavior, these four
questions cannot be addressed independently. Firstly,
we can generally perform only one action of the same
level at a time (we cannot at the same time go to the
kitchen to eat and to the bedroom to have some rest).
Secondly, the decisions taken at various levels must be
consistent (imagine what happens if we decide that the
need to address is hunger, if we select a salient visual
goal like a predator approaching and if we grasp a bot-
tle located nearby...). P. Redgrave and colleagues have
nicely addressed this problem in (Redgrave, Prescott,
& Gurney, 1999) and have proposed that the basal
ganglia (BG) is the cerebral structure responsible for
solving this kind of conﬂict in the brain, underlining
that, even if some internal processing are distributed,
the process of action selection is fundamentally centra-
lised, which is rather rare in brain functioning.

The inner process of the BG is very complex, in-
volving a variety of internal structures, pathways and
mechanisms, as evoked in (Redgrave, 2007), which are
still topics of intense research. Basically, the BG can

6

also be described as a sensorimotor set of nuclei, with
the striatum as an input structure receiving sensory
information and the internal part of the globus pal-
lidus and the substancia nigra pars reticulata (called
together GPi-SNr in primates ; can also correspond to
other structures in other species) acting as an output
motor structure. In accordance with most of the litera-
ture, we will ﬁrst evoke here some characteristics of the
loops between the BG and the cortex but we will also
mention that the subcortical structures evoked above
are also involved in these loops (McHaﬃe, Stanford,
Stein, Coizet, & Redgrave, 2005).

Several parallel loops (ﬁve in (Alexander, DeLong, &
Strick, 1986)) have been described between the cortex
and the BG, performing a generic function of action se-
lection. In summary (cf. section 7 and 8 for details), the
cortex can be separated in a sensory pole in the poste-
rior cortex and a pole representing actions or tasks in
the anterior (or frontal) cortex (Fuster, 1989). Depen-
ding on the current state in the sensory pole, actions
in the frontal cortex can be triggered and maintained
until some changes in the sensory pole are obtained.
Actions can be chosen on a frequency basis (the action
most often associated with a sensory event). Alterna-
tively, for some context, other more speciﬁc decision
might be taken to display a more adapted behavior
(and get consequently more reinforcement). In the ﬁrst
case, frequencies can be estimated by learning sensori-
motor contingencies in antero-posterior cortico-cortical
connections but this is not possible in the second case
because there is not a unique cortical region merging
contextual and reinforcement information with the cor-
responding sensorimotor information. This is exactly
what is proposed by the architecture of BG-loop, well
adapted for a such a contextual sensorimotor learning
controlled by the level of reinforcement.

For each BG-cortex loop, a region of the striatum
receives aﬀerent information from frontal and poste-
rior cortical regions and one among the tasks repre-
sented in the frontal region is going to be selected by
a funneling eﬀect from the striatum to GPI-SNr and
back to the frontal cortex after a thalamic step, de-
pending on the nature of the sensory information re-
ceived in the striatum (Alexander et al., 1986). This
process of action selection is generally related to rein-
forcement learning, with a prominent role for the do-
pamine, sent by the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and
the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) to modulate
cortico-striatal connections and minimize reward pre-
diction errors (Joel, Niv, & Ruppin, 2002).

The loops are displayed on a posterior-anterior axis
in the frontal cortex and also correspond to diﬀerent

and well-identiﬁed regions of the striatum, as conﬁr-
med by many data reporting the topographical organi-
zation of projections and of information representation
in these circuits (Alexander et al., 1986 ; Parent & Haz-
rati, 1995). The loops have been named depending on
the frontal areas mainly engaged and consequently on
the kind of tasks selected by the loops (Alexander et al.,
1986). In the motor loop, the dorsolateral striatum
receives information from the motor cortex and pro-
prioceptive information from the sensory cortex. The
loop is somatotopically organized, which makes it or-
ganized to select diﬀerent classes of actions, e.g. invol-
ving the face, the arm or the legs (Alexander et al.,
1986). The oculomotor loop (Hikosaka, Nakamura,
& Nakahara, 2006) participates in gaze orientation and
also involves regions of the dorsolateral sensorimotor
striatum receiving projections from the posterior dor-
sal cortex together with the frontal eye ﬁeld frontal
area, known to encode gaze movement (Sommer &
Wurtz, 2004). The lateral prefrontal cortex loop,
also called the cognitive loop, involves the dorsomedial
striatum and associative regions of the posterior and
prefrontal cortex and is mainly engaged in cognitive
control (Koechlin, Ody, & Kouneiher, 2003), related to
the ability of the prefrontal cortex to manipulate abs-
tract rules, as described below in section 8. In the an-
terior cingulate loop, the ventral striatum (mainly
the core of the nucleus accumbens) receives sensory
information about the needs of the body and the US
experienced and is rather involved in the level of ’wan-
ting’ associated to the needs, with the anterior cingu-
late cortex in the medial prefrontal cortex monitoring
performance with regards to the association of actions
and reinforcement, to decide for a cost of action (fa-
tigue, risk) adapted to the level of wanting (energizing
role of motivation (Niv, 2007)). In the orbitofron-
tal loop, the ventral striatum (mainly the shell of the
nucleus accumbens) receives information from the pos-
terior ventral cortex and from the hippocampus, giving
sensory details about objects, and from the orbitofron-
tal cortex, reported to encode the reward value of ob-
jects, typically of the CS, and to deﬁne the ’liking’ of
objects or their hedonic value (Kringelbach, 2005).

The anatomical organization of the BG has been des-
cribed by the parallel processing made by these segre-
gated loops but also by a convergence of information
(Parent & Hazrati, 1995) due to several characteristics.
Within loops, a funneling eﬀect is obvious when the re-
duction in the size of data ﬂow from the cortical input
to the output of the loops in GPi-SNr is considered
(Joel et al., 2002). Between loops, overlapping schemes
can be deduced from several principles, like the spi-

7

ral principle proposed in (Haber, Fudge, & McFarland,
2000), where pathways between loops can be observed
through dopaminergic projections and through over-
lapping prefrontal representations from one loop to the
next. This is also the case, considering the participa-
tion of the subcortical structures mentioned in section
4.2 in the loops. They can be functionally associated,
one to one, to the loops as proposed in ﬁgure 2, whereas
anatomical data suggest a wider scheme, for example
with the cerebellum linked to the motor and oculomo-
tor loops (Hikosaka et al., 2006) or the amygdala linked
to orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate loops (Cardinal
et al., 2002).

As it is proposed in ﬁgure 2, taking appart the cogni-
tive loop that will be described in section 8, each of the
other four BG-cortex loop can be seen independently
as selecting an action (or a task or a decision, depen-
ding on the nature of information) with regards to its
aﬀerent information and as participating to the answer
to one of the four fundamental questions. In the or-
bitofrontal loop, What is the goal of my behavior ? In
the anterior cingulate loop, Why should I spend energy
satisfying the corresponding need (and up to which le-
vel) ? In the oculomotor loop, Where is this object ?
In the motor loop, How should I behave (which action
should I trigger) to get it ?

Depending on the complexity of the task and on
the richness of the environment, these decisions can
be constrained and articulated in diﬀerent ways. On
one extreme, we are in the domain of goal-directed be-
havior, when there are several answers to each ques-
tions, and when loops must interact to ﬁnd the best
global solution : contingencies between local decisions
and their consequences must be known and correspon-
ding reinforcements must be evaluated and compared.
This can be associated to the domain of model-based
reinforcement learning (Dayan & Niv, 2008) and to the
domain of hierarchical planning (Pezzulo & Castelfran-
chi, 2009), with the classical steps of deciding for goal,
motivation, strategy and execution and of backtracking
in the hierarchy when one step is impossible. On the
other extreme, we are in the domain of habits, where
the current state is enough to directly trigger the action
with no need to refer a priori to a model of sensorimo-
tor transitions or to the value of the outcome, as it is
the case in model-free reinforcement learning (Dayan
& Niv, 2008). Many behavioral experiments (Packard
& Knowlton, 2002) have shown that both types of lear-
ning are present and in competition in the brain and
probably that the longlasting learning of the later is
dependent on a supervision by the former. It is conse-
quently important to wonder how the rich representa-

tions of states and of sensorimotor contingencies nee-
ded by goal-directed behavior are built by learning and
have been complexiﬁed through evolution, as we evoke
now.

6 Keeping a memory of past epi-

sodes

Basically, we have explained above that, to give an
ecological meaning to our behavior, our direct sensori-
motor capabilities (being able to orient toward an ob-
ject of interest (the where question) and being able to
exploit the object with the body (the how question))
are enslaved by the motivational and emotional ana-
lysis of the situation (the why and what questions).
At a ﬁrst level of complexity, this can be performed
by primitive structures (amygdala, PAG and hypotha-
lamus) learning simple pavlovian associations and ha-
ving strong relations with the ventral striatum. In the
simplest case, when the goal of the behavior has been
identiﬁed in the sensory region of the amygdala (BLA)
and is directly available for consumption, BLA acti-
vates the amygdalar output CeA for pavlovian response
and sends also projections to the shell of NAcc for
the corresponding consummatory behavior. Anatomi-
cal and functional considerations underline how these
responses are similar. There is in fact anatomical conti-
nuity between CeA and the shell of NAcc with a propo-
sed similar functional organization (Cassell, Freedman,
& Shi, 1999) including strong dopaminergic innervation
and projections to the same regions of motor output
(including PAG and lateral hypothalamus). When the
target of the behavior is not directly identiﬁed, the ge-
neral class of motivation can give information to ener-
gize a preparatory behavior that will result in selecting
the target. This is allowed by projections from CeA to
the core of NAcc and can result in simple autoshaping
or in more complex goal-directed behavior. This view
gives to the ventral striatum (or NAcc) a central role
at the interface between pavlovian and instrumental
learning. That is the reason why it is particularly in-
teresting to remark that, considering more elaborated
information that was incorporated to the system along
evolution and particularly in birds, episodic memory
originating from the hippocampus is projected to the
striatum mainly in its ventral division (Voorn, Vander-
schuren, Groenewegen, Robbins, & Pennartz, 2004).

Within the medial temporal lobe generally repor-
ted as dedicated to declarative memory, the hippocam-
pus is more precisely associated to episodic memory
(Tulving, 1972), that allows us to remember speciﬁc

8

Figure 2 – This scheme of the brain underlines some important anatomical and functional characteristics to
better understand how information ﬂows are processed in the brain. It is proposed that ﬁve kinds of neuronal
structures bring more and more complexity and ﬂexibility along phylogeny : (i) extracortical structures (the
Amygdala, the Hypothalamus, the Superior Colliculus (SC) and the Cerebellum), (ii) the Basal Ganglia (with
the striatum composed of its dorsolateral part DLS, dorsomedial part DMS and limbic part, also called Nucleus
Accumbens NAcc with a shell and a core part ; with output structures like the internal Globus Pallidus and
the substantia nigra pars reticulata GPI-SNr and the ventral pallidum VP ; with dopaminergic regions ventral
tegmentum area VTA and substantia nigra pars compacta SNc) ; (iii) the hippocampus with its main inter-
nal structures dentate gyrus DG, CA3 and CA1 and its input cortical structures ; (iv) several regions of the
sensory cortex receiving inputs from the sensory thalamus ; (v) several regions of the frontal cortex including
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex vmPFC, the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex dmPFC, the lateral prefrontal
cortex with ventral and dorsal parts vlPFC and dlPFC, the frontal eye ﬁeld FEF and the motor and premotor
regions. As explained in more details in the text, colors refers to the major implication of certain regions in
these structures, to answer to fundamental questions for the selection of goals (what goal and why ?) and for
their spatial access (where and how ?). These colors also refer to preferential projections between these regions,
particularly forming loops between the structures, even if the text also explains that some complex functions
result from interactions between diﬀerent loops.

9

events in their context. Through its input structure,
the entorhinal cortex, the hippocampus receives corti-
cal information from the posterior ventral cortex rela-
ted to the what and why questions (via the perirhinal
cortex) and from the posterior dorsal cortex related
to the where and how questions (via the postrhinal
or parahippocampic cortex) and aggregate them, in-
cluding their organization in time (Jensen & Lisman,
2005), in an episode or event. This association of arbi-
trary information is made possible by the unique recur-
rent architecture of the hippocampal region CA3 that
makes it work as an associative memory, learning very
rapidly an event (Kassab & Alexandre, 2015). Deci-
sion to memorize an event can be taken intrinsically
on the basis of its novelty and from extrinsic aﬀerents,
particularly originating directly or indirectly from the
amygdala (Paz & Paré, 2013), signaling errors of re-
ward prediction and consequently a need for a more
precise learning. Errors might be due to ambiguities in
the conjunction of features (O’Reilly & Rudy, 2001)
or in their temporal ordering, as the hippocampus is
also particularly critical for sequence and delay lear-
ning (Jensen & Lisman, 2005). Conversely, in the re-
call process, the hippocampus can be activated from
partial information, evoke the complete episode and
facilitate reactivation of other brain regions (Gruber
& McDonald, 2012) via its output structures CA1 and
the subiculum. This has been for example reported as
contextual signals sent to the amygdala for the extinc-
tion of pavlovian conditioning (Moustafa et al., 2013)
or as predictive signals of possible paths sent to the
prefrontal cortex and the ventral striatum during navi-
gation of rats in a maze (Gruber & McDonald, 2012).
From its ability to store and later detect and re-
call complex multimodal episodes, particularly inclu-
ding delays between their constituents, the hippocam-
pus provides the ventral striatum and the amygdala
with more complex features than simple sensory cues
sent by the thalamus or the cortex. It is for example
reported that hippocampal inputs are critical to the
amygdala in pavlovian trace conditioning (Paz & Paré,
2013), when the CS and the US are separated by a de-
lay. This also allows to create conditioned reinforcers
in the amygdala, corresponding to subgoals or interme-
diate steps in a sequence of behaviors, sent to the ven-
tral striatum and evoking surrogates of rewards when
the actual reward is distant, as it is often the case in
instrumental conditioning (Cardinal et al., 2002).

The distinction evoked above between the posterior
ventral cortex (the what and why questions) represen-
ting perception for recognition and the posterior dor-
sal cortex (the how and where questions) rather re-

presenting perception for action (Milner & Goodale,
1995) has also been clearly reported in the hippocam-
pus (Fanselow & Dong, 2015), with a dorsal region ra-
ther involved in navigation, with neurons coding for
location (place cells) or head direction and a ventral
region rather involved in emotional aspects and mas-
sively projecting to the amygdala and to the ventral
striatum (mainly the shell). It must be noted that the
dorsal hippocampus also projects to the core of the ven-
tral (and the dorsomedial) striatum and to the anterior
cingulate cortex (Pennartz, Ito, Verschure, Battaglia,
& Robbins, 2011), which underlines the special posi-
tion of this BG-cortex loop, intermediate between pav-
lovian and instrumental conditioning and associating
basically actions and outcomes. This will be discussed
in more details below.

In summary, the hippocampus can represent com-
plex events, corresponding to speciﬁc episodes, intro-
ducing rich and complex sensory information in pav-
lovian and instrumental conditioning. This gradient of
complexity in sensory inputs, from speciﬁc cues enco-
ded in the sensory cortex to cognitive maps and emo-
tional episodes in the dorsal and ventral hippocampus
is very nicely illustrated in (Voorn et al., 2004), gathe-
ring anatomical information in rats about hippocampal
projections to the striatum, the amygdala and the fron-
tal cortex, also ordered along that gradient. Such com-
plex information allows birds and mammals to learn
pavlovian associations with a complex pattern in time.
It is also critical in goal directed behavior which re-
quires the prospective evocation of perception-action
contingencies and of outcome values, as it has been re-
ported in the hippocampus and the ventral striatum
(Bornstein & Daw, 2011).

Experiments in rats (Packard & Knowlton, 2002)
have shown that rapid and ﬂexible goal-directed beha-
vior involving the hippocampus and the dorsomedial
striatum can be replaced by repetition by an habitual
behavior involving the dorsolateral striatum and cor-
responding to a simple stimulus-response association
insensitive to reward devaluation. Since the dorsolate-
ral striatum has no hippocampal but only cortical sen-
sory inputs, it can be thought that the slow habitual
learning is constrained by the time for consolidation
from the hippocampus to the sensory cortex, of the
critical events triggering the response. In fact, when ha-
bits have been learned, the same experiments (Packard
& Knowlton, 2002) show that both goal-directed and
habitual learning coexist and are in competition. In a
very interesting view (Penner & Mizumori, 2012) using
the actor/critic framework where reinforcement lear-
ning is decomposed in an actor applying the current po-

10

licy (rules of behavior) and a critic learning from errors
of prediction the value of the outcomes and modifying
the policy correspondingly, the dorsolateral striatum is
proposed to be the actor for habitual behavior and the
dorsomedial striatum to be the actor for goal-directed
behavior. The shell, corresponding to the consumma-
tory behavior and learning explicitly the value of the
outcome, is proposed to be the critic of the dorsomedial
striatum, learning explicitly the model of the world for
goal-directed behavior, whereas the core, associated to
preparatory behavior not speciﬁc of the outcome and
learning only to associate an action to a motivational
value, should be the critic of the dorsolateral striatum,
associating directly in a habitual mode states to ac-
tions.

All these pieces of information give a very important
role to the ventral striatum at the interface between
limbic and motor systems. (Mannella, Gurney, & Bal-
dassarre, 2013) describes the ventral striatum as the
place where motivational values are assigned to goals
from their pavlovian value given by the amygdala and
their salience and novelty given by the hippocampus.
This results in associations between the outcomes and
their motivational value in the shell and between ac-
tions and the outcomes in the core, and the correspon-
ding energizing eﬀect on instrumental behavior. The
dorsomedial striatum is also a key player in instru-
mental behavior and its role will become more clear
as more details are given about the prefrontal cortex
in the next section.

7 Building abstract categories

Beyond the memory of speciﬁc episodes, an impor-
tant innovation has been brought by the cortex to build
structured high-level information over simple signals :
the elaboration of abstract categories composing a se-
mantic memory. In the posterior cortex such a repre-
sentation is built on data ﬂows corresponding to the
sensory dimensions evoked by the four questions dis-
cussed above (cf. also ﬁgure 3). This results in hierar-
chical cortical areas with neuronal populations respon-
ding to more and more complex objects (Rousselet et
al., 2004), building more and more abstract categories
in the ventral information ﬂow relating the exterocep-
tive and interoceptive poles, for the What and Why
questions. Based on considerations on the timing of in-
formation propagation (Nowak & Bullier, 1997), the in-
formation ﬂow is described as parallel rather than serial
in the dorsal pathway to elaborate categories between
the exteroceptive and motor poles, related to the ques-

tions Where and How, even if intermediate strategies
are also observed in associative areas, between a pu-
rely constructivist hierarchical and a purely purposive
specialized view of information processing (Norman,
2002). This intricate representation is particularly use-
ful to account for selective attention, a function of the
posterior cortex particularly critical in primates (Fix,
Rougier, & Alexandre, 2011), associating selection of
spatial regions and implicit or explicit (covert or overt)
involvement of body parts in the dorsal regions toge-
ther with an anticipation of the subregion of the sen-
sory space that will be available and the focused pro-
cessing of critical features in the ventral regions.

In these associative regions, one crucial (and still
open) question is about the choice of the compound
objects to be represented since the combinatorics is ob-
viously too large for a systematic representation. This
selection is made by learning and in an ecological view,
a simple (but vague) criterion is : « Those which are
the most useful to the organism ». A more precise spe-
ciﬁcation must rely on the mechanisms triggering sen-
sory learning in the posterior cortex (Ahissar & Hoch-
stein, 1993), including the role of cholinergic modu-
lation triggered by the amygdala, in case of error of
prediction, to favor attentional process in the cortex
(Pauli & O’Reilly, 2008), and the role of reinstatement
of episodes in the cortex, driven by the hippocampus
in the consolidation process (McClelland, McNaugh-
ton, & O’Reilly, 1995).

Another important actor in the processes described
in this section is the thalamus (Sherman, 2007), for
the critical role of its sensory part in the activation of
the posterior cortex, conciliating feed-forward sensory
input and feed-back cortical expectations, and also in
cortical learning of new categories, particularly invol-
ving multimodal features. Nevertheless, it will not be
described in details in this paper. Nor will be described
the motor thalamus, even if it also has a critical role in
the functioning of the frontal cortex presented below.

8 Building ﬂexible sequences

Among the characteristics of the frontal cortex, the
capacity of focused populations to sustain their activity
in a working memory process is one of the most criti-
cal (Fuster, 1989). The organization of the frontal lobe
can be described in reference to regions of the posterior
cortex in which frontal regions can control transitions
of states (Burnod, 1989). In the motor cortex, neurons
arranged in stripes symmetrical to the somatosensory
area can trigger elementary actions modifying the posi-

11

Figure 3 – This ﬁgure integrates the enactive view of the brain-body-environment system and the functional
view of brain structure in a behavioral organization, where sensory interoceptive and exteroceptive poles interact
with the limbic and motor poles to decide for the main characteristics of the behavior. Basically, addressing the
four fundamental questions results in specifying sensory constraints in the motor pole related to the position
in space and to the body, and in the interoceptive pole related to pain and pleasure and to fundamental needs.
This will deﬁne preferences and motivations in the limbic pole, generating directly a consummatory behavior
or organizing a preparatory behavior with the motor pole that can particularly trigger movements and evoke
selective attention to obtain desired changes in the internal and external world and, accordingly, in the sensory
perceptions.

12

tion of the bodily scheme until the sensory goal of the
action (e.g. position of a limb, characteristics of the
sound produced by the phonatory apparatus) is rea-
ched. Motor control is also reported in the premotor
cortex, with a more integrated topography (Graziano,
2006), corresponding to more ecological categories of
the behavioral repertoire like climbing, reaching, etc.
Similarly, in oculomotor regions like the frontal eye
ﬁeld (Sommer & Wurtz, 2004), transitions are between
initial and ﬁnal targeted eye positions.

The same process of control of transition between
present and targeted states can be used to describe
the functions of the limbic frontal regions. In the ven-
tromedial prefrontal cortex, regions like the orbito-
frontal cortex have been described to receive extero-
ceptive and interoceptive sensory inputs (Kringelbach,
2005) to encode the value of emotional stimuli, seen
as potential goals of the behavior. This is the ba-
sis for emotional control, with the selection of a de-
sired goal that is sustained until that goal is consu-
med (or given up). Complementary to the consumma-
tory behavior, the preparatory behavior is organized
in the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, with areas like
the anterior cingulate cortex performing motivational
control (Kouneiher, Charron, & Koechlin, 2009). Ba-
sically, these regions, described as associating actions
to outcomes, are in charge of deciding if the energy re-
quired by the actions selected in the preparatory phase
is worth the corresponding need. Accordingly, they are
reported to energize the behavior, i.e. to evaluate up to
which level it can be engaged and, when a strategy is
selected, to maintain this selection until it is achieved.
It can be remarked that the medial prefrontal cortex
is also structured in a ventral part, deciding for the se-
lection of a goal from its features, and a dorsal part,
selecting the dimension on which to apply the strategy
(and accordingly the action). In both cases, when this
selection is not trivial and requires elaborated rules,
the needed cognitive control recruits additional circuits
in the lateral prefrontal cortex (Badre, 2008). This re-
gion, increasingly large in primates, is also distributed
in ventral and dorsal regions and is reported to elabo-
rate more complex rules with complexity deﬁned as the
level of sequential arrangement of actions in the dor-
solateral prefrontal cortex and as the level of precision
in the deﬁnition of cues in the ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex (O’Reilly, 2010), both together able to build a
complex strategy, decomposing a goal and a level of
engagement in subgoals and actions to get them. The
same principle of maintenance of activity until satisfac-
tion (or giving up) results in resistence to distraction,
another strong characteristic of the prefrontal cortex.

Some generic mechanisms of the frontal cortex, evo-
ked in all the regions, can be re-interpreted now. Each
region has been described as preferentially linked to
posterior cortical regions and composed of actions (or
tasks) monitoring a transition from one state represen-
ted in this posterior region to another (from an initial
to a ﬁnal position ; from need (e.g. water deprivation)
to satisfaction of the need (satiety)). This can be in-
terpreted with the scheme S1 − A − S2, where S1 is
the initial condition eliciting A as a possible action (cf.
(O’Regan & Noë, 2001) and the principle of aﬀordance)
and S2 is the consequence that can be anticipated if A
is preactivated. Conversely, if S2 is a desired state, A is
the action that has to be activated to obtain S2 , which
is possible if S1 is compatible with the current state.
Else, A can display a sustained activity, as in working
memory state, and remain active until S1 is satisﬁed.
This interpretation is reminiscent of behavioral studies
where antecedents and consequences of goal-directed
actions are seen as beliefs and desires (Balleine, Lilje-
holm, & Ostlund, 2009) and of more theoretical works
on planning (Burnod, 1989 ; Pezzulo & Castelfranchi,
2009) explaining how goals (desires) can be decompo-
sed in subgoals (S1 becomes desired) and recursively
executed in such S1−A−S2 schemes. In our view, these
intermediate steps with subgoals are built by cognitive
control in lPFC : the goal remains active as a working
memory in mPFC and activates subgoals and means
(sequences of actions) to get them in lPFC until good
conditions are met (e.g. ﬁnding the kitchen seen as a
subgoal to open the fridge), without forgeting the ini-
tial goal, as ensured by the sustained activity insensi-
tive to distraction. This view is very consistent with an
interpretation of the role of the BG for the dynamic ga-
ting of PFC representations (O’Reilly, Herd, & Pauli,
2010), switching from the updating of the choice of the
best action to be selected (from the prediction of the
value of its consequence) to the maintenance of its sus-
tained activity until this consequence is obtained. This
also explains why goal-directed behavior is deﬁned by
its sensitivity to goal devaluation and contingencies of
actions (Balleine et al., 2009) : in the habitual mode, S1
directly triggers A with no consideration of S2 and of
the value of the goal obtained at the end of the process.

Globally, this heavy and structured process of the
frontal (=prefrontal + premotor and motor) cortex can
be summarized as follows : Exteroceptive and inter-
oceptive stimuli can elicit preactivations in the motor
and limbic prefrontal cortex which can also evoke the
anticipated consequences in exteroceptive and inter-
oceptive terms. In simple and stable worlds, the elabo-
rated model of the world can become of good predictive

13

quality and at the end the initial stimuli can be suﬃ-
cient to trigger directly the actions without evoking
their consequences. This corresponds to the habitual
mode, progressively shifting the control from the lim-
bic to the motor loops (Hélie, Ell, & Ashby, 2015) and
in the long term, only mobilizing the motor cortex in
a basic stimulus-response scheme. Nevertheless, in the
early phases of learning or when the world is changing
or when the best behavior to be selected does not cor-
respond to the most frequent (for example in a speciﬁc
context), a more precise analysis of the recent history of
performance must be carried out, involving the limbic
parts of the prefrontal cortex and of the basal ganglia.
This is the reason why the dorsomedial prefrontal cor-
tex is often reported to be involved in error detection
and conﬂict monitoring (Rushworth, Walton, Kenner-
ley, & Bannerman, 2004) and the ventromedial pre-
frontal cortex to be sensitive to devaluation of outcome
(Kringelbach, 2005) for example in case of reversal and
extinction. The interoceptive preactivation of the lim-
bic loops can evaluate and supervise this goal-directed
learning, depending if gains or losses are observed bet-
ween anticipated and actually obtained punishments
and rewards, and results in the selection of the current
goal and motivation.

In this goal-directed process, the role of the basal
ganglia is prominent as a critic to learn from errors of
prediction and as an actor to explicitely trigger step
by step the full plan of action, as it was explained
above. Concerning the transition between loops, note
for example that both ventro- and dorsomedial prefron-
tal cortex project to the dorsomedial striatum (Gruber
& McDonald, 2012) and that the exteroceptive preac-
tivation of the motor loop is critical to oﬀer aﬀordances
that help select the most appropriate preparatory be-
havior (Pezzulo & Castelfranchi, 2009), also supposed
to be performed in the striatal region. The role of the
dopamine must be also particularly emphasized here,
with dopaminergic projections from VTA to the ven-
tral striatum mainly for pavlovian aspects and from
SNc to the dorsomedial striatum for the instrumental
aspects, in interaction with the lateral prefrontal cor-
tex (Yin, Ostlund, & Balleine, 2008). These pathways
are at the basis of the spiral principle by S. Haber evo-
ked above (Haber et al., 2000), also concerned with the
articulation between BG-cortex loops.

9 Discussion

In this paper, we have proposed a systemic descrip-
tion of the brain, as a general framework for integrating

more speciﬁc models in computational neuroscience.
Beyond its intrinsic interest, this framework is also ne-
cessary, else the risk is to build models of particular
neuronal structures in isolation without reference to
more global information ﬂows and cognitive functions
and consequently to neglect some characteristics of the
structure or to overload it with functions carried out
in other parts of the cerebral network.

This framework considers several fundamental as-
pects of the brain, seen as the device controlling the
behavior of the body, as summarized in ﬁgure 3 : (i)
In an enactive view, the brain has to elaborate loops
with the internal and the external environments (cf.
ﬁgure 1) and to ensure their stability for the gene-
ral goal of survival. This circular causality has already
been expressed in many systemic views, including in
computational neurocience, a very interesting approach
exploiting the powerful formalism of thermodynamics
(Friston, 2012). It conﬁrms also the fundamental orga-
nization of the brain in sensorimotor loops and struc-
tures (Guillery, 2005). (ii) To provide a more precise ac-
count of the various characteristics of behavior, we have
structured brain functions as answering to four funda-
mental questions (what, why, where and how). From
the basic what/where system (Ungerleider & Mishkin,
1982), this has a long history in neuroscience, inclu-
ding more recent and precise views (Milner & Goodale,
1995 ; O’Reilly, 2010). In particular, a very close formu-
lation is proposed in (Verschure, Pennartz, & Pezzulo,
2014) but is less accurate concerning the mapping to
brain structures and functions. (iii) As represented in
ﬁgure 2, anatomical and dynamical considerations are
added to explain how these questions can be addres-
sed in brain structures, particularly taking phylogeny
into account. Primitive animals have the same funda-
mental problems of behavior organisation for survival ;
the main diﬀerence is about the quantity and quality
of information that is provided to deﬁne the needs and
elaborate the answers.

Elaborating such a framework is also interesting be-
cause it provides opportunities to put together many
facts at various levels of description and to elaborate
on them principles of brain functioning and of cogni-
tive architecture. Basically, the behavior is elaborated
from cross-talk between the motor and limbic poles (cf
ﬁgure 3). The motor pole receives aﬀordances from the
exteroceptive pole that might result in triggering habits
or at least preactivating some actions. The limbic pole
receives emotional and motivational information from
the interoceptive pole which can directly trigger pav-
lovian reﬂexes and consummatory behavior and lead
to the deﬁnition of goals and motivations. Then, ins-

14

trumental conditioning will allow to specify the more
appropriate preparatory behavior, based on preactiva-
ted actions and learned contingencies.

As we might expect, this sketch gives a prominent
role to pavlovian and instrumental conditioning, in this
survival-oriented deﬁnition of behavior. Nevertheless,
the speciﬁc contribution of other kinds of learning is
obvious, speciﬁcally related to semantic memory in the
posterior cortex, episodic memory in the hippocampus
and working memory in the frontal cortex. More fun-
damentally, this also lays emphasis on the fact that
cognition can be described as a dynamical system of
interacting memories, some acting to provide informa-
tion to others, to replace others when they are not eﬃ-
cient enough, or to help for the convergence of others.
Such principles have already been described with a very
strong impact in improving our understanding of cogni-
tive mechanisms (McClelland et al., 1995). The frame-
work that we have proposed here is a very convenient
tool to study such mnemonic synergies, very diﬃcult
to delimit because not related to a unique cognitive
function. We have for example seen that goal-directed
behavior can generate a prospective memory (also cal-
led « memory of the future » (Fuster, 1989)), as it is
observed for places in the hippocampus and for rewards
in the ventral striatum and can also generate a retros-
pective memory that can participate in training the
habitual system (Bornstein & Daw, 2011). Precisely
understanding how these processes work and interact
is an important challenge for future research.

Describing the brain as an architecture of learning
systems has also strong implications in Machine Lear-
ning. In addition to the deﬁnition of interacting mne-
monic synergies as a basis to ensure really autonomous
learning, which is very poorly addressed in classical
Machine Learning, a more realistic view of pavlovian
and instrumental conditioning can be very precious to
revisit classical Reinforcement Learning. Such a contri-
bution is for example proposed in (Balasubramani,
Chakravarthy, Ravindran, & Moustafa, 2014) where
the selection of action is controlled by a utility func-
tion, deﬁned by a weighted combination of value and
risk. This can extend the classical actor/critic archi-
tecture and needs to be deepen, since many questions
remain about the exact location of the critic (if any)
and about the validity of the hypothesis of a double
model-based and model-free actor-critic system evoked
above (Penner & Mizumori, 2012).

Our systemic framework is also useful because it
helps revisit the role of certain cerebral structures. Par-
ticularly, it appears from our analysis that the BG
is best deﬁned as a modulatory system that provides

adaptive gating signals to the frontal cortex, instead of
the prevalent ideas that BG directly encodes S-R as-
sociations and can be deﬁned as a procedural learning
system. This is conﬁrmed by the (relatively) low im-
pact of BG lesions in the behavior performances but
rather in learning (Packard & Knowlton, 2002). One
step further, the following phylogenetic interpretation
could be proposed : Beyond simple reactions due to pri-
mitive extracortical structures, the hippocampus and
the BG could be proposed as two structures endowed
with rapid learning to adapt the behavior to speciﬁc
cases, respectively corresponding to emotional episodes
and to behaviors where the motivation must be explici-
tely reminded. But in both cases, the goal of the orga-
nism is to identify and learn criteria to automatize the
behavior. In the same way as there is a consolidation
from the hippocampus to the posterior cortex to create
new categories in the semantic memory, appropriate to
discriminate the world, the transfer from goal-directed
behavior involving the BG to habits in the motor pole
of the frontal cortex might be seen as a way to create
motor routines, giving a behavioral repertoire adapted
to our needs. At the end, this would result in a system
parallel to the primitive extracortical structures, ex-
cept that the sensory and motor characteristics would
have been selected and learned in a slow process, from
interactions with the world.

Our framework also indicates some speciﬁc struc-
tures, which can be seen as a kind of hub in the cogni-
tive architecture, because they are fundamentally mul-
timodal and coordinate transfers between memory sys-
tems. For diﬀerent reasons, this is particularly the case
with the ventral striatum and the hippocampus which
woud have to be studied more deeply in that perspec-
tive. Another domain which remains not detailed en-
ough is the precise deﬁnition of the mechanisms of cog-
nitive control, with the elaboration of complex rules in
the lateral prefrontal cortex and their speciﬁc dorsal
and ventral aspects. Preliminary theories have already
been proposed (Badre, 2008 ; Koechlin et al., 2003) and
should be more deeply explored in speciﬁc behavioral
applications for a better understanding.

It might also be said that this paper proposes a very
« mechanical » view of the brain, neglecting highest
cognitive functions of the brain, for example related to
social aspects, language, not to evoke internal thought,
mind wandering and consciousness. We think in fact
that most of these functions rely on the same bases as
the ones evoked here, even if of course our view still has
to be consolidated and made more precise, particularly
concerning the thalamus and neuromodulation, hardly
described here.

15

Références

Ahissar, M., & Hochstein, S.

(1993). Attentional
control of early perceptual learning. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the Uni-
ted States of America, 90 (12), 5718–5722.
Alexander, G., DeLong, M., & Strick, P. (1986). Pa-
rallel organization of functionally segregated cir-
cuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Ann. Rev.
Neurosci., 9 , 357-381.

Badre, D. (2008). Cognitive control, hierarchy, and the
rostro–caudal organization of the frontal lobes.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12 (5), 193–200.

Balasubramani, P. P., Chakravarthy, V. S., Ravindran,
B., & Moustafa, A. A. (2014). An extended rein-
forcement learning model of basal ganglia to un-
derstand the contributions of serotonin and dopa-
mine in risk-based decision making, reward pre-
diction, and punishment learning. Frontiers in
computational neuroscience, 8 .

Balleine, B. W., & Killcross, S. (2006). Parallel incen-
tive processing : an integrated view of amygdala
function. Trends Neurosci , 29 (5), 272–279. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2006.03.002

Balleine, B. W., Liljeholm, M., & Ostlund, S. B. (2009).
The integrative function of the basal ganglia in
instrumental conditioning. Behav Brain Res,
199 (1), 43-52+.

Bandler, R., & Shipley, M. T. (1994). Columnar organi-
zation in the midbrain periaqueductal gray : mo-
dules for emotional expression ? Trends in Neu-
rosciences, 17 (9), 379–389.

Belova, M. A., Paton, J. J., Morrison, S. E., & Salz-
man, C. D. (2007). Expectation modulates neu-
ral responses to pleasant and aversive stimuli in
primate amygdala. Neuron, 55 (6), 970–984.
Bornstein, A. M., & Daw, N. D. (2011). Multiplicity
of control in the basal ganglia : computational
roles of striatal subregions. Current opinion in
neurobiology, 21 (3), 374–380.

Burnod, Y. (1989). An adaptive neural network : the

cerebral cortex. Masson.

Cardinal, R. N., Parkinson, J. A., Hall, J., & Eve-
ritt, B. J.
(2002). Emotion and motivation :
the role of the amygdala, ventral striatum, and
prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience & Biobehavio-
ral Reviews, 26 (3), 321–352. doi: 10.1016/s0149
-7634(02)00007-6
Carrere, M., & Alexandre, F.

(2015). A pavlovian
model of the amygdala and its inﬂuence within
the medial temporal lobe. Frontiers in Systems
Neuroscience, 9 (41).

Cassell, M. D., Freedman, L. J., & Shi, C. (1999). The
Intrinsic Organization of the Central Extended
Amygdala. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 877 (1), 217–241.

Craig, A.

(2009). How do you feel – now ? the an-
terior insula and human awareness. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci., 10 , 59–70.

Craig, A. D. (2003). Interoception : the sense of the
physiological condition of the body. Current Opi-
nion in Neurobiology, 13 (4), 500–505.

Damasio, A. R., & Carvalho, G. B. (2013). The na-
ture of feelings : Evolutionary and neurobiologi-
cal origins. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14 (2),
143–152.

Dayan, P., & Niv, Y. (2008). Reinforcement learning :
the good, the bad and the ugly. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology, 18 (2), 185–196.
Dean, P., Redgrave, P., & Westby, G. W.

(1989).
Event or emergency ? Two response systems in
the mammalian superior colliculus. Trends in
neurosciences, 12 (4), 137–147.

Dickinson, A., & Balleine, B. W. (2002). The Role of
Learning in the Operation of Motivational Sys-
tems. In H. Pashler & R. Gallistel (Eds.), Ste-
vens’ handbook of experimental psychology (3rd
éd., Vols. 3 : Learning, Motivation and Emotion,
pp. 497–533). New York : John Wiley & Sons.

Fanselow, M. S., & Dong, H.-W. (2015). Are the Dorsal
and Ventral Hippocampus Functionally Distinct
Structures ? Neuron, 65 (1), 7–19.

Fix, J., Rougier, N. P., & Alexandre, F. (2011). A Dy-
namic Neural Field Approach to the Covert and
Overt Deployment of Spatial Attention. Cogni-
tive Computation, 3 , 279–293.

Friston, K. (2012). A Free Energy Principle for Bio-
logical Systems. Entropy (Basel, Switzerland),
14 (11), 2100–2121.

Fuster, J. (1989). The prefontal cortex. anatomy, phy-
siology and neurophysiology of the frontal lobe.
Raven Press, New-York.

Genud-Gabai, R., Klavir, O., & Paz, R. (2013). Safety
Signals in the Primate Amygdala. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 33 (46), 17986–17994.

Graziano, M.

(2006). The organization of behavio-
ral repertoire in motor cortex. Annual review of
neuroscience, 29 , 105–134.

Gros, C. (2010). Cognition and Emotion : Perspectives
of a Closing Gap. Cognitive Computation, 2 (2),
78–85.

Gruber, A. J., & McDonald, R. J. (2012). Context,
emotion, and the strategic pursuit of goals : In-
teractions among multiple brain systems control-

16

ling motivated behaviour. Frontiers in Behavio-
ral Neuroscience, 6 (50).

Guillery, R. W.

(2005). Anatomical pathways that
link perception and action. In Progress in brain
research (Vol. 149, pp. 235–256). Elsevier.
Haber, S., Fudge, J., & McFarland, N. (2000). Stria-
tonigrostriatal pathways in primates form an as-
cending spiral from the shell to the dorsolateral
striatum. The Journal of Neuroscience, 20 (6),
2369-2382.

Hélie, S., Ell, S. W., & Ashby, F. G. (2015). Learning
robust cortico-cortical associations with the basal
ganglia : An integrative review. Cortex , 64 , 123–
135.

Hikosaka, O., Nakamura, K., & Nakahara, H. (2006).
Basal Ganglia orient eyes to reward. J. Neuro-
physiol , 95 (2), 567–584.
Jensen, O., & Lisman, J. E.

(2005). Hippocam-
pal sequence-encoding driven by a cortical multi-
item working memory buﬀer. Trends in Neuros-
ciences, 28 (2), 67–72.

Joel, D., Niv, Y., & Ruppin, E. (2002). Actor–critic
models of the basal ganglia : new anatomical and
computational perspectives. Neural Networks,
15 (4-6), 535–547.
Kassab, R., & Alexandre, F.

Integration of
exteroceptive and interoceptive information wi-
thin the hippocampus : a computational study.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 9 (87).
Koechlin, E., Ody, C., & Kouneiher, F. (2003). The
Architecture of Cognitive Control in the Human
Prefrontal Cortex. Science, 302 (5648), 1181–
1185.

(2015).

Kouneiher, F., Charron, S., & Koechlin, E.

(2009).
Motivation and cognitive control in the human
prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 12 (7),
939–945.

Kringelbach, M. L. (2005). The human orbitofrontal
cortex : linking reward to hedonic experience. Nat
Rev Neurosci , 6 (9), 691–702.

Laborit, H. (1976). Eloge de la fuite. Folio Essais.
LeDoux, J. (2007). The amygdala. Current Biology,

17 (20), R868–R874.

Lee, C., Rohrer, W. H., & Sparks, D. L. (1988). Popula-
tion coding of saccadic eye movements by neurons
in the superior colliculus. Nature, 332 (6162),
357–360. doi: 10.1038/332357a0

Mannella, F., Gurney, K., & Baldassarre, G. (2013).
The nucleus accumbens as a nexus between va-
lues and goals in goal-directed behavior : a review
and a new hypothesis. Frontiers in behavioral
neuroscience, 7 .

17

Manto, M., Bower, J. M., Conforto, A. B. B., Delgado-
García, J. M., da Guarda, S. N. F. N., Gerwig,
M., . . . Timmann, D. (2012). Consensus paper :
roles of the cerebellum in motor control–the di-
versity of ideas on cerebellar involvement in mo-
vement. Cerebellum (London, England), 11 (2),
457–487.

McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly,
R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary
learning systems in the hippocampus and neo-
cortex : insights from the successes and failures
of connectionist models of learning and memory.
Psychological review , 102 (3), 419–457.

McHaﬃe, J. G., Stanford, T. R., Stein, B. E., Coizet,
V., & Redgrave, P.
(2005). Subcortical loops
through the basal ganglia. Trends in neuros-
ciences, 28 (8), 401–407. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2005
.06.006

Middleton, F. A., & Strick, P. L. (2000). Basal ganglia
and cerebellar loops : motor and cognitive cir-
cuits. Brain Research Reviews, 31 (2), 236–250.
Milner, A., & Goodale, M. (1995). The visual brain in

action. Oxford University Press, USA.

Moustafa, A. A., Gilbertson, M. W., Orr, S. P., Her-
zallah, M. M., Servatius, R. J., & Myers, C. E.
(2013). A model of amygdala–hippocampal–
prefrontal interaction in fear conditioning and ex-
tinction in animals. Brain and Cognition, 81 (1),
29–43.

Niv, Y. (2007). Cost, Beneﬁt, Tonic, Phasic : What
Do Response Rates Tell Us about Dopamine and
Motivation. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1104 (1), 357–376.

Norman, J. (2002). Two visual systems and two theo-
ries of perception : An attempt to reconcile the
constructivist and ecological approaches. Beha-
vioral and Brain Sciences, 25 , 73–144.

Nowak, L. G., & Bullier, J. (1997). The timing of infor-
mation transfer in the visual system. In K. S. Ro-
ckland, J. H. Kaas, & A. Peters (Eds.), Extras-
triate cortex in primates (Vol. 12, pp. 205–241).
New York : Plenum.

O’Regan, J. K., & Noë, A.

(2001). A sensorimotor
account of vision and visual consciousness. The
Behavioral and brain sciences, 24 (5).

O’Reilly, R. C. (2010). The What and How of pre-
frontal cortical organization. Trends in Neuros-
ciences, 33 (8), 355–361.

O’Reilly, R. C., Herd, S. A., & Pauli, W. M. (2010).
Computational models of cognitive control. Cur-
rent Opinion in Neurobiology, 20 (2).

O’Reilly, R. C., & Rudy, J. W.

(2001). Conjunc-

tive Representations in Learning and Memory :
Principles of Cortical and Hippocampal Func-
tion. Psychological Review , 108 (2), 311–345.
Oudeyer, P.-Y., Kaplan, F., & Hafner, V. (2007). In-
trinsic motivation systems for autonomous men-
IEEE Transactions on Evo-
tal development.
lutionary Computation, 11 (2), 265-286.
doi:
10.1109/TEVC.2006.890271

Packard, M. G., & Knowlton, B. J. (2002). Learning
and memory functions of the basal ganglia. An-
nual review of neuroscience, 25 (1), 563–593.
Parent, A., & Hazrati, L. N. (1995). Functional ana-
tomy of the basal ganglia. I. The cortico-basal
ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop. Brain Res Brain
Res Rev , 20 (1), 91–127.

Parvizi, J.

(2009). Corticocentric myopia : old bias
in new cognitive sciences. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 13 (8), 354–359.

Pauli, W. M., & O’Reilly, R. C. (2008). Attentional
control of associative learning–a possible role of
the central cholinergic system. Brain Research,
1202 , 43–53.

Paz, R., & Paré, D.

(2013). Physiological basis for
emotional modulation of memory circuits by the
amygdala. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
23 (3), 381–386.

Pennartz, C. M., Ito, R., Verschure, P. F. M. J., Bat-
taglia, F. P., & Robbins, T. W.
(2011). The
hippocampal-striatal axis in learning, prediction
and goal-directed behavior. Trends in neuros-
ciences, 34 (10), 548–559.
Penner, M. R., & Mizumori, S. J. Y.

(2012). Neu-
ral systems analysis of decision making during
goal-directed navigation. Progress in neurobio-
logy, 96 (1), 96–135.

Pessoa, L., & Adolphs, R. (2010). Emotion processing
and the amygdala : from a ’low road’ to ’many
roads’ of evaluating biological signiﬁcance. Na-
ture reviews. Neuroscience, 11 (11), 773–783. doi:
10.1038/nrn2920

Pezzulo, G., & Castelfranchi, C. (2009). Thinking as
the control of imagination : a conceptual frame-
work for goal-directed systems. Psychological Re-
search, 73 (4), 559–577.

Pfeifer, R., Bongard, J., & Grand, S.

(2007). How
the body shapes the way we think : a new view of
intelligence. MIT Press.

Redgrave, P.

(2007). Basal Ganglia. Scholarpedia,

2 (6), 1825.

Redgrave, P., Prescott, T. J., & Gurney, K. (1999).
The basal ganglia : A vertebrate solution to the
selection problem ? Neuroscience, 89 (4), 1009–

18

1023.

Rousselet, G., Thorpe, S., & Fabre-Thorpe, M. (2004).
How parallel is visual processing in the ventral
path ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8 (8), 363–
370.

Rushworth, M. F. S., Walton, M. E., Kennerley, S. W.,
& Bannerman, D. M. (2004). Action sets and
decisions in the medial frontal cortex. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 8 (9), 410–417.

Sherman, S. (2007). The thalamus is more than just
a relay. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 17 ,
417–422.

Sommer, M., & Wurtz, R.

(2004). What the brain
stem tells the frontal cortex. I. Oculomotor si-
gnals sent from superior colliculus to frontal eye
ﬁeld via mediodorsal thalamus. Journal of neu-
rophysiology, 91 (3), 1381–1402.

Swanson, L. W., & Petrovich, G. D. (1998). What is
the amygdala ? Trends in Neurosciences, 21 (8),
323–331.

Taouali, W., Goﬀart, L., Alexandre, F., & Rougier,
(2015). A parsimonious computatio-
N. P.
nal model of visual target position encoding in
the superior colliculus. Biological Cybernetics,
109(4)(8), 549–559.

Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory.
Organization of Memory. Academic Press..

Ungerleider, L., & Mishkin, M.

(1982). Two corti-
cal visual systems. In D. Ingle, M. Goodale, &
R. Mansﬁeld (Eds.), Analysis of visual behavior
(pp. 549–586). MIT Press.

Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The
embodied mind : Cognitive science and human ex-
perience. Cambridge, MA : MIT Press.

Verschure, P. F. M. J., Pennartz, C. M., & Pezzulo, G.
(2014). The why, what, where, when and how of
goal-directed choice : neuronal and computatio-
nal principles. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B : Biological Sciences, 369 (1655),
20130483+.

Voorn, P., Vanderschuren, L. J., Groenewegen, H. J.,
Robbins, T. W., & Pennartz, C. M. (2004). Put-
ting a spin on the dorsal-ventral divide of the
striatum. Trends Neurosci , 27 (8), 468–474.
Yin, H. H., Ostlund, S. B., & Balleine, B. W. (2008).
Reward-guided learning beyond dopamine in the
nucleus accumbens : the integrative functions of
cortico-basal ganglia networks. European Journal
of Neuroscience, 28 (8), 1437–48.

