Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive
information within the hippocampus: a computational
study
Randa Kassab, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Randa Kassab, Frédéric Alexandre. Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information within
the hippocampus: a computational study. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2015, ￿10.3389/fn-
sys.2015.00087￿. ￿hal-01237876￿

HAL Id: hal-01237876

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01237876

Submitted on 3 Dec 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 05 June 2015
doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00087

Integration of exteroceptive and
interoceptive information within the
hippocampus: a computational study

Randa Kassab 1, 2, 3\* and Frédéric Alexandre 1, 2, 3

1 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France, 2 LaBRI, UMR 5800, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, Bordeaux
INP, Université de Bordeaux, Talence, France, 3 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientiﬁque, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France

Many episodic memory studies have critically implicated the hippocampus in the
rapid binding of sensory information from the perception of the external environment,
reported by exteroception. Other structures in the medial temporal lobe, especially the
amygdala, have been more speciﬁcally linked with emotional dimension of episodic
memories, reported by interoception. The hippocampal projection to the amygdala is
proposed as a substrate important for the formation of extero-interoceptive associations,
allowing adaptive behaviors based on past experiences. Recently growing evidence
suggests that hippocampal activity observed in a wide range of behavioral tasks could
reﬂect associations between exteroceptive patterns and their emotional valences. The
hippocampal computational models, therefore, need to be updated to elaborate better
interpretation of hippocampal-dependent behaviors. In earlier models, interoceptive
features, if not neglected, are bound together with other exteroceptive features through
autoassociative learning mechanisms. This way of binding integrates both kinds of
features at the same level, which is not always suitable for example in the case of
pattern completion. Based on the anatomical and functional heterogeneity along the
septotemporal and transverse axes of the hippocampus, we suggest instead that distinct
hippocampal subregions may be engaged in the representation of these different types
of information, each stored apart in autoassociative memories but linked together in a
heteroassociative way. The model is developed within the hard constraint of rapid, even
single trial, learning of episodic memories. The performance of the model is assessed
quantitatively and its resistance to interference is demonstrated through a series of
numerical experiments. An experiment of reversal
learning in patients with amnesic
cognitive impairment is also reproduced.

Keywords: episodic memory, single-trial
behaviors

learning, binding, valence,

interference, hippocampal-dependent

1. Introduction

Since Tulving’s (1972) proposal to consider the concept of episodic memory as a speciﬁc form of
declarative memory that allows us to explicitly remember individually experienced events within
their context, a consensus has been emerging that the hippocampus, a medial temporal lobe
structure, is crucially involved in the encoding, storage and retrieval of spatial and nonspatial

Edited by:
Vassilis Cutsuridis,
Foundation for Research and
Technology - Hellas, Greece

Reviewed by:
Ehren Lee Newman,
Boston University, USA
Toshikazu Samura,
Yamaguchi University, Japan

\*Correspondence:
Randa Kassab,
INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200
Avenue de la Vieille Tour, 33405
Talence, France
randakassab@gmail.com

Received: 22 January 2015
Accepted: 22 May 2015
Published: 05 June 2015

Citation:
Kassab R and Alexandre F (2015)
Integration of exteroceptive and
interoceptive information within the
hippocampus: a computational study.
Front. Syst. Neurosci. 9:87.
doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00087

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

1

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

episodic memories (Cohen and Eichenbaum, 1993; Eichenbaum
et al., 2012; Rolls, 2013). Equally, a number of emotional
and instrumental behaviors show a similar dependence on the
hippocampus (Kennedy and Shapiro, 2009; Shohamy et al., 2009;
Eichenbaum et al., 2012; Maren, 2014). Memory of the context
in which a reward or punishment has been received can become
reactivated through explicit or implicit recall processes (Lisman
and Redish, 2009). This reactivation is thought of as a prospective
use of episodic memory traces for anticipating future events and
selecting strategic actions (Lee et al., 2006; Shohamy et al., 2009).
In both cases, the speciﬁc contribution of the hippocampus
is related to its unique ability to rapidly learn and use bindings
of arbitrary relations among separate perceptual features of
an experience (Cohen and Eichenbaum, 1993; O’Reilly and
Rudy, 2001). This binding has often been considered to be
ﬂexible in the sense that established memories can be reactivated
by related retrieval cues in novel situations that are diﬀerent
from the original situation in which learning took place. It
has been suggested that all hippocampal subregions [dentate
gyrus (DG), CA3, and CA1] are important for the processing
of episodic memory, with each subregion mediating distinct
but interdependent computations, e.g., pattern separation in
the DG (Leutgeb et al., 2007; Rolls, 2013), pattern completion
in CA3 (Rolls, 2013), matching and novelty detection in CA1
(Hasselmo et al., 1996). Processing of spatial and non-spatial
information, however, reveals the existence of a functional
segregation along the transverse hippocampal axis in CA1
(Tamamaki and Nojyo, 1995), and, more recently,
in CA3
as well (Nakamura et al., 2013). Recent studies have also
drawn attention to the fact
that CA3 is not a uniform
network with completely random connections (de Almeida
et al., 2007; Witter, 2007; Bush et al., 2010; Nolan et al., 2011;
Kesner, 2013). Three subregions, CA3a, b, and c, are usually
identiﬁed. Both CA3a and CA3b (close to CA1) have strong
recurrent connections and relatively few connections with CA1,
whereas CA3c (close to the DG) has relatively few recurrent
connections but sends strong projections to CA1 (Hunsaker et al.,
2008).

Strong evidence for functional diﬀerentiation along the
septotemporal axis has also been derived from anatomical,
behavioral, and gene expression studies (Moser and Moser,
1998; Thompson et al., 2008; Fanselow and Dong, 2010). The
dorsal/septal and ventral/temporal poles of the hippocampus
diﬀer strikingly in their aﬀerent and eﬀerent connections to
cortical and subcortical structures. The dorsal hippocampus
has—via the entorhinal cortex (EC)—bidirectional connectivity
with various cortical regions known to be implicated in the
processing of visuospatial
information, whereas the ventral
hippocampus is more strongly connected to regions implicated
in emotional and motivational behaviors, such as hypothalamus,
prefrontal cortex (PFC), amygdala and insular cortex (van Groen
and Wyss, 1990; Pitkänen et al., 2000; Cenquizca and Swanson,
2007). Consistent with this pattern of connectivity, dorsal
hippocampal lesions have been found to disrupt spatial memory
whereas ventral
lesions alter stress and emotional functions
(Henke, 1990; Moser et al., 1995; Kjelstrup et al., 2002). At the
moment evidence grows in support of a more reﬁned division

of the septotemporal axis of the hippocampus (Thompson et al.,
2008; Bast et al., 2009; Strange et al., 2014).

The hippocampus and its associated functions have been
extensively studied in modeling works. To date, however,
it has been proved diﬃcult to render hippocampal models
compatible with both episodic memory and other cognitive
functions that involve volitional and reﬂex motor responses
(e.g., classical conditioning Gluck et al., 2003). Models that
underlie episodic memory should be able to rapidly encode
neural representations of single experiences, but models that seek
to explain hippocampal involvement in emotional and behavioral
tasks require many training trials for learning to be eﬀective
(O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001). These later roughly fall into one of
two categories as described below.

In the ﬁrst category are models based on the assumption that
the role of the hippocampus is restricted to the association or
binding of sensory features that depend on the perception of the
external environment (exteroception; see Table 1). They take the
view that the formation of extero-interoceptive associations lies
exclusively in the change in the synaptic strength of extrinsic
connections between the hippocampus and other emotion-
related structures, like the amygdala (LeDoux, 2007), especially
its basolateral nucleus (BLA) (Eichenbaum et al., 2012), relying
on error-driven learning mechanisms (Schmajuk and DiCarlo,
1992; Meeter et al., 2005). This kind of learning appears to
be consistent with the slow acquisition of various conditioned
behaviors, but does not seem to delineate a complete picture of
the functional role of the hippocampus. A number of context-
dependent behaviors change as the result of a single, past
experience. For example, (Wiltgen et al., 2006) demonstrated
that contextual fear learning can be acquired after a single
conditioning trial when the hippocampus is intact. Rapid
behavioral reversal in early extinction trials is likely to be driven

TABLE 1 | Glossary.

Term

Description

Exteroception

The perception of environmental stimuli originating outside of
the body, e.g., visual, acoustic, or tactile stimuli.

Interoception

The perception of the body’s internal state through the
processing of signals arising from within the body, e.g., blood
pressure, heart beats, etc. Interoceptive features may reﬂect
the emotional valence, arousal and other somatic states.

Valence

Arousal

Valence-
overload

One of the most commonly described dimensions of
emotions that ranges from highly positive to highly negative
according to how pleasant or unpleasant a stimulus might be.

The activation dimension that ranges from calm to
excitement.

A condition that occurs when a stimulus or a cue is
simultaneously associated to different, sometimes
contradictory, valences.

Valence-
overload
interference

A decrement in the ability of a memory system to reliably
remember previously formed associations between
exteroceptive stimuli and their emotional valences.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

2

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

by the hippocampus (Shohamy et al., 2009). It is suggested by
the same token that the hippocampus may be involved in the
immediate recovery of fear responses as observed after extinction
in the amygdala (Hobin et al., 2006). These data, together with
the high connectivity of the hippocampus with interoceptive
perceptual systems (Pitkänen et al., 2000; Craig, 2009), raise the
possibility to extend the rapid binding in the hippocampus to
capture interoceptive features of episodic memories.

it

Now,

is known from neurophysiological data that
hippocampal activity is related to the valence (e.g., reward,
neutral, or punishment) of experiences. There is evidence that
CA3 contains a representation of reward-place associations
that may be used to remember goals available at diﬀerent
locations (Rolls and Xiang, 2005). Selective neuronal responses
to reward delivery have been recorded in the hippocampus
(Smith and Mizumori, 2006) and in the EC (Sugase-Miyamoto
and Richmond, 2007). Furthermore, activity in CA1 has been
observed to signal learning-related prediction errors in reference
to past experiences (Wirth et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2012).

The second category of models is coherent with these ﬁndings,
being developed with a consideration of interoceptive features,
speciﬁcally emotional valences, as a relevant part of episodic
memories (Gluck and Myers, 1993; O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001;
Moustafa et al., 2009; Rolls, 2010). A “ﬂat” representation
which concatenates all the perceived sensory features, both
exteroceptive and interoceptive, is used and stored in a single
autoassociative network which supports pattern completion.
These models have proved to be eﬀective for valence prediction
and to account for a wide range of classical conditioning tasks.
However, as others before, neural representations are gradually
shaped over a signiﬁcant number of training trials, a compelling
reason why they are thought to be incompatible with the widely
held view of single-trial hippocampal acquisition of episodic
memories and other forms of one-experience context-dependent
tasks (Gluck et al., 2003). Yet, all of these models, mostly oriented
toward hippocampal involvement in adaptive behaviors, have
not attempted to explicitly ascertain their performance under
diﬀerent recall conditions. The quality of valence prediction was
tested using all of the previously encountered exteroceptive cues
associated with learning. However, recall is usually believed to
occur when subsets of exteroceptive cues of past experiences are
reactivated. Simply binding extero-interoceptive features onto
a single pattern of activity as proposed above implies that,
under recall conditions with partial exteroceptive cues, a pattern
completion process would concurrently ﬁll in what is missing
from exteroceptive and interoceptive patterns. This may result
in impaired performance on valence prediction relative to that
under full-cue recall conditions.

are

learned both within and outside

In sum, at the biological level of analysis, a great deal of
evidence exists to support the view that extero-interoceptive
associations
the
hippocampus. So high plasticity in the hippocampus may
represent
the neural substrate for the rapid acquisition of
some hippocampally-dependent behaviors, even in a single
trial as may occur in episodic memory. Other more slowly
acquired behaviors may depend on incremental
learning
involving other brain structures, like the amygdala, but remain

nevertheless dependent on the hippocampus as a primary source
of contextual inputs. On the other hand, to our knowledge,
no computational models have been developed to explain
how extero-interoceptive associations might be rapidly formed
within the hippocampus. Indeed, single-trial learning is a hard
learning problem, particularly when emotional memories have
to be considered (Mather, 2009). Take, for example, the case
of three emotionally valenced patterns AB+, AC−, and BD−.
It is possible to store each of these patterns by strengthening
associative links between its three constituent features. However,
exteroceptive features, like A and B, which are shared among
positively and negatively valenced patterns, will become paired
with both positive and negative valences. This will, of course,
lead to a wrong prediction of AB valence when presented as a
retrieval cue to the network. This type of interference, which we
will refer to as “valence overload,” can be solved by incremental
learning through a series of presentations of the set of input
patterns in order to gradually discover their latent structure
interfering patterns.
representations of
and adjust neural
The computational challenge that needs to be addressed,
however, is how to go about doing so under the condition
of rapid learning which may be the natural province of the
hippocampus.

to address

independent

The computational model that we describe in this paper
is
the rapid, one-trial, binding of
the ﬁrst
extero-interoceptive features within the hippocampus. In line
the
with the anatomical and functional heterogeneity of
hippocampus, our model is based around an integrated network
of interconnected auto- and heteroassociative memories. Instead
of
the purely autoassociative way of binding proposed by
previous models, neural assemblies representing exteroceptive
sensory inputs and their emotional valences are considered
as two sets of
in
autoassociative memories that are linked in a heteroassociative
way. This implies a distinction between two speciﬁc forms of
interference, namely “pattern overload” and “valence overload,”
that can occur respectively at the level of the autoassociative
and heteroassociative memories. Pattern overload has been
extensively addressed under the assumption that
the DG
implements pattern separation mechanisms to ensure the
successful encoding of distinct memory traces in the CA3
autoassociative network (Rolls, 2010). Therefore, we will focus
primarily here on demonstrating the ability of the model to
rapidly link exteroceptive patterns and their emotional valences
while avoiding valence-overload interference.

features, each stored apart

2. Materials and Methods

2.1. Network Architecture and Computational
Principles
The major component of the proposed model is the hippocampal
network (Figure 1). The input-output relations between the
hippocampal network and other brain areas are implemented
as distinct patterns of activity across populations of cells in
the entorhinal cortex (EC). The computational implementation
details can be found in Table 2.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

3

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 1 | The architecture of the hippocampal model. (A) General
schematic diagram showing the input-output relationships that the model
is hypothesized to have with other brain regions. Black arrows indicate
ﬂow of exteroceptive information while blue arrows indicate ﬂow of
interoceptive information among the identiﬁed regions. Abbreviations:
PHC, parahippocampal cortex; PRC, perirhinal cortex. (B) The
hippocampal model
implemented in this study. Network inputs
correspond to the activities of cells in the entorhinal cortex, which
respond to exteroceptive features as well as interoceptive, valence,

states related to external stimuli. Black lines denote the basic circuit of
the model while blue lines denote changes in circuitry mediated by
valence-associated cells (blue) following the detection of
valence-overload interference (red arrow). Autoassociative and
heteroassociative connectivities between hippocampal cells are denoted
respectively by bidirectional dashed lines and simple dashed lines
without arrows. Inhibitory connections between valence cells are
denoted by lines ended with circles. Stable non-plastic connections,
both excitatory and inhibitory, are denoted by solid lines.

The model receives two kinds of sensory inputs, a(e) and a(i),
reﬂecting exteroceptive and interoceptive patterns of activity of
aﬀerent input from the EC (Figure 1A). Interoceptive patterns
may reﬂect the emotional valence (pleasantness of the events),
arousal (the intensity of emotion provoked by the experienced
events) and other somatic states (e.g., hunger or satiety) of
external stimuli. However, for simplicity, we focus on the valence
of the presented stimuli but all computations in the model
generalize trivially to other interoceptive features.

Two autoassociative networks are considered in the model.
They receive independently exteroceptive and interoceptive
input patterns, a(e) and a(i), via one-to-one connectivity with

EC cells. The ﬁrst network operates, as it is usually the case, to
link exteroceptive features of a given stimulus by strengthening
recurrent synaptic weights, w(e)
, between co-active cells. The cells
ij
in the second autoassociative network serve a similar function for
interoceptive features via their recurrent connections, w(i)
ij .

In addition, the model includes a small number of ordered
groups of intermediate valence cells that receive stimulus valence
from the same interoceptive pathways. As long as no inhibition
is exerted on the ﬁrst group of intermediate valence cells, its
cells can be directly activated by interoceptive inputs to the
model and are therefore considered as the primary valence cells.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

4

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

TABLE 2 | Model equations for learning and recall processes.

#

Equation

RECALL

Description

ˆa(e)
j = H(

n

X
i=1

ij a(e)
w(e)

i −

n

X
i=1

a(e)
i

)

H(x) = 


1,

0,

if x ≥ 0

if x < 0

The exteroceptive autoassociative network is presented a retrieval cue, a(e) ∈ {0, 1}n, from the entorhinal cortex
(EC). The retrieval activity pattern ˆa(e) ∈ {0, 1}n is obtained by summing dendritic input from the recurrent
connections for each cell, j, and applying a ﬁring threshold θ =

.

n
i

˜a(e)
i

P


l = ˆy(v)
y(v)
l ∧ ¯Il
n
ˆy(v)
l = H(

X
j=1

w(e−v)
jl

Il =

p×m

\_
i=1

Iil ˆy(v)
i

ˆa(e)
j −

n

X
j

ˆa(e)
j

)

The output of the exteroceptive autoassociative network, ˆa(e), drives retrieval in the heteroassociative network. An
intermediate valence cell, l, can ﬁre (y(v)
l = 1) only if the dendritic sum of its excitatory inputs exceeds the speciﬁed
threshold (ˆy(v)
l = 1) and if it does not receive inhibitory inputs from other valence cells that have already ﬁred (¯Ij = 1
or Ij = 0).

ˆa(i)
j = H(

w(i)
ij

˜a(i)
i −

m

X
i=1

˜a(i)
i

)

˜a(i)
k =

w(v−i)
ik

y(v)
i

m

X
i=1
p×m

\_
i=1

LEARNING
w(e)
ij

L1

(t + 1) = w(e)
ij

(t) ∨ (a(e)

i ∧ a(e)

j

The activity of the intermediate valence cells serves as input to the interoceptive autoassociative network through
prewired connections, w(v−i)
. The initial input is denoted by ˜a(i) and ˆa(i) speciﬁes the retrieved output, via recurrent
connections, w(i)
ij .

ik

)

The activity state of n cells in the exteroceptive autoassociative network is determined only by afferent inputs from
the EC, a(e) ∈ {0, 1}n. The recurrent synaptic weight w(e)
ij between two cells i and j is clipped at 1 if both cells are
active; otherwise, no change occurs. Initially, w(e)
ij

(0) = 0.

R1

R2

R3

L2

L3

ij (t + 1) = w(i)
w(i)

ij (t) ∨ (a(i)

i ∧ a(i)

j

)

i ∧ h(v)

j

ij

j ∧ ¯Ij

(t) ∨ (a(e)

(t + 1) = w(e−v)

w(e−v)
ij
h(v)
j = x(v)
x(v) = (m1a(i), m2a(i), ..., mpa(i))
2 , ..., g(v)
y(v) = (g(v)
p )

1 , g(v)

a(i) ∈ {0, 1}m speciﬁes interoceptive, valence, activity pattern from the EC and w(i)
interoceptive autoassociative network. Initially, w(i)

ij (0) = 0.

ij speciﬁes synaptic weights of the

)

The intermediate valence cells are organized into p groups of m cells. As long as no inhibition is exerted on the
primary group, its cells can be activated directly by interoceptive inputs from the EC (m1 = 1). The interoceptive
input, a(i), on the remaining p − 1 groups of valence cells is gated by being multiplied by mk signals that coincide
with the detection of interference (4k−1 = 1). The interference condition veriﬁes when the distance (HD) between
the retrieval activity, y(v)
k ) and the interoceptive activity from the EC (a(v))
j
exceeds a threshold v. Initially, w(e−i)

, across the valence cells of a group k (g(v)

(0) = 0.

ij

m1 = 1, mk∈[2,p] = 


1,

if 4k−1 = 1

0, otherwise

4k =

m

X
i=1

g(v)
ki


> 0 ∧ HD(g(v)

k , a(v)) > v

Interoceptive inputs on the cells in the other groups, which
are termed associated cells, are conditional. This means that
interoceptive inputs can not evoke postsynaptic activity within
the associated cells unless a concomitant signal mk emanating
from a precedent group of valence cells is applied. The occurrence
of mk signals coincides with the detection of interference at the
level of the activity pattern of the corresponding group of valence
cells (cf. Section 2.2 and Equation L3 in Table 2).

The cells within the same group of intermediate valence
cells are not interconnected but inhibitory connections, Iij, exist
between cells belonging to diﬀerent groups. These connections
are not plastic,
they are prewired such that an inhibitory
connection from cell i to cell j exists (Iij = 1) if the two cells
belong respectively to diﬀerent groups, k and l, and l precedes
k. Thus, each group of associated cells, once activated, exerts a
shunting-type inhibitory eﬀect on its preceding groups including
the primary group of valence cells, and at most valence cells in
one group can be active at a time.

The coupling of exteroceptive sensory information to their
emotional valences occurs at the level of heteroassociative links,
w(e−v)
, between the exteroceptive autoassociative network and
ij
intermediate valence cells. These latter provide, in turn, direct
excitatory input to the interoceptive autoassociative network
through prewired connections, w(v−i)
. Speciﬁcally, a connection
(w(v−i)
ik
of valence; otherwise, w(v−i)

= 1) is wired if cells i and k are sensitive to the same kind

= 0.

ij

ik

The standard binary version of the Willshaw associative
network (Steinbuch, 1961; Willshaw et al., 1969) is used as a basis
to simulate both auto- and heteroassociative memory functions
in the model. It is one of the most eﬃcient associative memory
networks as long as the patterns to be stored are sparse (Graham
and Willshaw, 1997), and is often used for modeling neural
circuits across brain regions (Palm, 2013), and widely adopted
for estimating the potential storage capacity in the hippocampus
(Bennett et al., 1994; Dubreuil et al., 2014).

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

5

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

The Willshaw’s heteroassociative network is a feedforward
network with two layers of McCulloch-Pitts binary threshold
cells. The n cells of the input layer are fully connected to m cells
in the output layer through modiﬁable binary synapses, wij ∈
{0, 1}n×m. The network can store M pairs of binary patterns
presented at the input and output layers ({(xµ, yµ)}, xµ ∈
{0, 1}n, yµ ∈ {0, 1}m, µ = 1 . . . M), by setting synaptic strengths
according to a clipped version of Hebbian learning: a single
coincidence of presynaptic and postsynaptic activity (xµ
i = 1 and
yµ
j = 1) is enough to change the synaptic weight wij from 0 to 1,
while further co-activations do not induce further changes.

For identical input and output patterns (xµ = yµ and
n = m), it is trivial to conﬁgure the Willshaw’s network to act
autoassociatively as a single-layer network with n cells connected
through recurrent synaptic connections, wij ∈ {0, 1}n×n.

P

When the network is used for recall by presenting a cue
pattern ˜x on the input layer, a pattern of output activity can
n
be recalled if dendritic potential (sj =
i=1 wij ˜xi) exceeds a
global ﬁring threshold θ . A well-selected value of the threshold
is important for successful recall. Here we use the classical
threshold as proposed by Willshaw et al. (1969), that is, the
n
number of active cells in the input (θ =
i=1 ˜xi). This strategy
is simple and biologically plausible as it can be implemented,
for example, through feedforward inhibition (Knoblauch et al.,
2010). The quality of a recalled pattern can be assessed according
to its diﬀerence from the originally stored pattern. Here we use
Hamming distance as a basis for the assessment of recall quality.
Hamming distance between two binary patterns x and y, HD(x,
y), is computed as the number of elements that diﬀer between the
patterns. For example, if x = (0 1 1 1 0) and y = (1 1 0 1 0) then
HD = 2.

P

2.2. Storage and Recall
The model’s dynamics are largely based on the assumption—
shared by many other hippocampal models (Hasselmo et al.,
1996; Meeter et al., 2004)—that the hippocampus generates
its own novelty signal and uses it as a basis for self-aligned
transitions between storage and recall modes. The essential idea
is that when novel patterns are presented to the hippocampus
an inhibitory eﬀect is exerted on the septum leading to strong
increase of acetylcholine (ACh) release from septal cholinergic
projections to the hippocampus. The increase in Ach appears
to give rise to speciﬁc network dynamics that favor response
to aﬀerent inputs while decreasing the synaptic transmission at
intrinsic modiﬁable synapses during learning (Hasselmo, 2006).
The model is simulated in discrete time steps, that is, the
activity states of cells/synapses at time step t determine the next
states at time t + 1. The mathematical details of the model
equations that govern the learning and recall processes are
presented in Table 2.

The recall process starts by presenting the exteroceptive
autoassociative network with a particular pattern of activity, a(e),
from the EC. The activity states of cells in the autoassociative
network are then updated according to the total recurrent
excitatory activity they receive. This yields the output pattern,
ˆa(e), which corresponds to pattern completion of exteroception.
Similarly, the activity, ˆa(e), propagates along heteroassociative

links and elicits activation of groups of intermediate valence cells,
y(v). Due to the inhibitory interactions between these groups,
at most valence cells in one group can become active. This
activation can trigger recall in the interoceptive autoassociative
network and a third pattern of activity, ˆa(i), emerges at the
output of the network which corresponds to valence prediction
(Figure 1).

Just after the completion of the exteroceptive pattern coming
from the entorhinal cortex (EC), a novelty-detection process
takes place to compare the retrieved pattern, ˆa(e), to the actual
pattern in the EC, a(e). The mismatch/novelty condition occurs
when the Hamming distance between the two patterns exceeds
a pre-speciﬁed threshold (HD(e) > e). If the EC activity pattern
corresponds to the retrieved pattern, valence prediction can be
signaled to other brain regions such as the amygdala.

Upon receipt of interoceptive information, a similar process
occurs to evaluate prediction error in terms of Hamming distance
between actual a(i) and predicted values ˆa(i). Likewise, novelty
occurs when the distance exceeds a pre-speciﬁed threshold
(HD(i) > v).

Errors in valence prediction can be related to two separate
factors: (1) It may be that the model does not have any prediction
for exteroceptive cues (if novel exteroceptive cues) or (2) may
stem from overload interference at the level of heteroassociative
links between exteroceptive patterns and their associated valences
(valence overload). In the ﬁrst case, it would be suﬃcient to store
the new inputs and their association to be retained and recalled
later. Direct learning of new associations in the second case will
continue to interfere with the recall of older, valence-related
information.

Pi y(v)

The model deals with valence-overload interference by
monitoring activity of intermediate valence cells, y(v), during
recall. If any activity is observed among intermediate valence
i > 0) in response to exteroceptive cues a matching
cells (
process takes place to determine whether this activity matches
valence-related activity in the EC. A mismatch (HD(v) > v)
signals a potential interference to a successive group of associated
valence cells that become able to respond to valence-related
inputs from the EC and rapidly silence valence cells that were
active in preceding groups.

Both exteroceptive inputs with high novelty (HD(e) > e) and
valence prediction errors (HD(i) > v) can induce dynamics that
favor learning of new inputs, otherwise the model settles in recall
mode.

During learning, excitatory intrinsic synaptic transmission is
removed and activity in the model is purely driven by aﬀerent
inputs from the EC, a(e) and a(i). Synaptic weights at the level of
auto- and heteroassociative networks are then updated according
to Equations (L1–L3) in Table 2.

As an example, Figure 2 shows how the model deals with
the case of the three emotional patterns (AB+, AC−, BD−)
discussed above. Following the encoding of the three patterns, the
presentation of AB will activate cells involved in coding positive
and negative valence. This pattern of activity triggers a mismatch
signal allowing the activation of a new group of associated cells
by EC aﬀerent inputs. Then, a new encoding of AB+ proceeds
with the new associated cells. A subsequent presentation of AB

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

6

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

Hamming distance equal to zero, while error means a Hamming
distance greater than zero.

To ensure that the eﬀects observed in the model stem from
valence overload interference at the level of heteroassociative
links, the model
is tested under the assumption of perfect
storage and recall within the autoassociative networks (pattern
overload interference can not occur at the level of autoassociative
memories). That is, the memory load is kept low to ensure an
error-free recall of stored exteroceptive patterns from full cues.

We start with a generic setup to examine the behavior of
the model under a number of diﬀerent conditions (such as
the number of stored patterns, and recall under full-cue vs.
partial-cue conditions). Our model is contrasted to a standard
autoassociative model, i.e., a single autoassociative network in
which both extero- and interoceptive inputs are considered
as two parts of a single pattern, as well as to a simple
heteroassociative model which can be thought of as a reduced
version of the proposed model without the groups of associated
cells.

The simulation experiments are organized in terms of one
or more blocks of trials (Figure 3). A block of n trials consists
of one pass through n extero-interoceptive patterns that are
randomly ordered in each block. A training trial begins with the
presentation of an exteroceptive pattern a(e) as a retrieval cue to
drive the recall process in the model. At the end of this process,
two patterns of activity emerge at the output of the model: ˆa(e)
which corresponds to pattern completion of exteroception, and
ˆa(i) which corresponds to valence prediction. Immediately after
that, the original valence pattern, a(i), is delivered in order to
evaluate the performance of the model and determine whether
it is necessary to shift the model into a learning mode to store
the externally presented patterns. Following the end of a given
experiment, errors are recorded over a block of testing trials in
which learning is disabled.

Next, we build upon a two-phase learning paradigm
established by Levy-Gigi et al. (2011) to investigate reversal
learning in patients with amnesic mild cognitive impairment
(aMCI) which may arise from hippocampal pathology. The ﬁrst
phase is a discrimination learning task in which participants
were presented with four diﬀerent cards containing a shape
representing a cue and a background representing a context.
Two of the cards are associated with positive outcome (winning
points) whereas the others are associated with negative outcome
(loosing points). Acquisition was followed by a reversal phase
where an additional set of 8 new cards was used with two
possibilities: A new card can share the same cue as an original
card but appears in a new context or a new cue can be presented
in the original context. The new cards were associated with the
opposite outcome relative to the discrimination learning phase.
The reversal phase was a series of retention and reversal trials.
On retention, the original cards were presented with the same
outcome, whereas cards with a new context or a new cue were
presented on reversal trials. Participants have to learn to reverse
their choice without a change in the relevant feature for a cue
or a context. To simulate this task, we generated three groups
of 4 exteroceptive patterns each. One of the 8 active cells is
used to encode the presence of a cue and the others to encode

FIGURE 2 | Illustration of how accumulated learning of emotional
stimuli causes valence interference and how the proposed model
attempts to solve it. (A) Initially, the model is trained on three emotional
patterns (AB+, AC−, BD−) where + indicates positive valence and – denotes
negative valence. Thick solid lines between exteroceptive layer and valence
cells are used to denote learned connections. The ﬁgure shows that the
learning of AC and BD patterns linked irrelevantly the components of AB to
negative valance. (B) Presentation of AB as a retrieval cue leads to the
activation of both cells in the primary group of valence cells. After the receipt of
the actual valence (+) of the pattern (AB), prediction error at the output of the
model causes its dynamics to favor learning, and concurrently the false pattern
of activity in the primary group of valence cell triggers a mismatch signal to the
next group of associated cells (red). This allows the positive valence-speciﬁc
cell in that group to ﬁre while cells in the primary group fall silent by inhibitory
effects of the associated group of valence cells.

will activate that associated cells which, in turn, inhibit preceding
valence cells allowing an accurate prediction of its associated
valence.

2.3. Simulation Methods
To validate the model outlined above, several simulations
were run. The stimulated model contains 300 cells
for
the exteroceptive autoassociative network, 3 cells for the
interoceptive, valence, autoassociative network. The intermediate
valence cells are organized into one primary group of 3 cells and
4 groups of 3 associated cells.

The entorhinal inputs are provided to the model as two
independent patterns of activity. The exteroceptive inputs are
modeled as a randomly constructed pattern of activity across
300 binary cells. The number of active cells was held ﬁxed at 8
(≃ log2(300), a maximal level of density allowing for a successful
recall in the Willshaw model) except where a partial cue is
used to elicit recall of previously stored information. To reﬂect
the emotional valence associated with exteroceptive patterns,
3 binary cells were used to diﬀerentiate positive, negative and
neutral valence states. One of these cells switches to its active
state according to whether a pleasant (100), unpleasant (010),
or neutral (001) stimulus is present. The novelty-detection
thresholds, e and v, are set to zero, except for simulations
described in Section 3.3.

The pattern of activity being recalled at the output of the
model corresponds to both pattern completion of exteroceptive
cues and valence prediction. Therefore, two kinds of recall errors
are considered when evaluating simulation results. One reﬂects
the mismatch between the stored and retrieved activation for
exteroceptive patterns. The other reﬂects the diﬀerence between
the predicted and correct valence. In both cases, errors are
deﬁned in terms of Hamming distance. No error implies a

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

7

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 3 | A trial, as experimentally designed, is composed of three
phases. The ﬁrst phase is a recall process triggered by the presentation of
an exteroceptive pattern, a(e), as a retrieval cue at the input of the model. At
the end of this phase, two patterns of activity emerge at the output of the
model: ˆa(e) corresponding to pattern completion of exteroception, and ˆa(i)

corresponding to valence prediction. The second phase begins with the
delivery of the original valence pattern, a(i), and two matching processes take
place to compute pattern completion and valence prediction errors. In the
third phase a learning process occurs in case of error/mismatch, otherwise a
correct trial is scored and the next trial begins.

the presence of a context. No overlap is allowed between cells
encoding for diﬀerent cues or contexts. That is, 8 diﬀerent cells
are used to encode 8 diﬀerent cues and 56 cells are used to encode
8 diﬀerent contexts. Positive and negative valences are associated
with the 12 patterns the same way as described above.

All simulation results reported in the next section are averaged
over 20 simulation runs with diﬀerent random patterns, and are
presented with a conﬁdence interval of 95%.

3. Results

No

between

observed

3.1. Predictive Recall Using Full Exteroceptive
Cues
In general, associative networks show a degradation in recall
quality as the number of stored patterns increases. Here we
investigate the eﬀect of the number of stored patterns on
valence prediction when no degradation in recall occurs at the
level of exteroceptive patterns. Our model, as well as standard
autoassociative and heteroassociative models, were trained on
blocks of N patterns that were randomly assigned to a positive,
negative or neutral valence.
diﬀerences were

standard
autoassociative and heteroassociative models. Taken together
in Figure 4A, results show that for a set of 10, 20, and up to 40
patterns the models make correct prediction. As the number of
stored patterns increases to 50 or more, the models continue
to reliably retrieve stored exteroceptive patterns but prediction
errors begin to occur more frequently, reaching about 25 of a
total of 100 patterns. The explanation lies in the fact that the
number of exteroceptive features far outnumbers that for valence,
then interoceptive features are much more willing to be shared
between stored patterns. This suggests that additional irrelevant
connections tend to be strengthened as long as novel patterns are
being stored. On the other hand, our model detects the eﬀect of
such irrelevant connections and attempts to prohibit interference
from occurring by promoting the recruitment of a successive
group of associated cells. Figure 4B shows how prediction errors
are signiﬁcantly reduced after the ﬁrst presentation of patterns
and reach zero after few additional presentations. In particular, at

N = 100 stored patterns, Figure 4C demonstrates that a gradual
reduction in prediction errors is observed across 4 blocks of
training trials due to the detection of a number of potential
problems of interference over each block of trial (Figure 4D). A
maximum of two groups of associated cells is needed to reduce
prediction errors to zero (Figure 4E).

3.2. Predictive Recall Using Partial Exteroceptive
Cues
Despite having observed in the simulations presented above that
recall proceeds in much the same way in standard autoassociative
and heteroassociative models, a functional diﬀerence is to
be expected when valence prediction is done on the basis
of partial exteroceptive cues. In a standard autoassociative
model, pattern completion and valence prediction are performed
concurrently while a heteroassociative model supports successive
recall processes in such a way that valence prediction could be
performed from a full representation of exteroceptive patterns
resulting from pattern completion under partial cue condition.
Based on this, one might predict that autoassociative models
would be more prone to prediction errors than heteroassociative
models.

To test

this prediction,

standard autoassociative and
heteroassociative models were trained on a set of 100 patterns
that were randomly assigned to a positive, negative or neutral
valence. After training, distinct input patterns were generated
from each of the trained exteroceptive patterns, such that a ﬁxed
number of active cells become quiescent (set to 0). This number
was increased from 1 up to 7 with subsequent testing trials.
The partial patterns were presented to the models and recall
performance was assessed (Figure 5).

Once again, both autoassociative and heteroassociative
models produced the same performance on pattern completion
of exteroceptive cues (Figures 5A,C). Both show a gradual
decline in pattern completion as the number of active cells
decreases but, as shown in Figure 5C, pattern completion is
almost perfect (HD ≤ 1) for 1 to 4 cells being silenced
or deleted in the originally trained patterns. This appears to
provide a clear support for the heteroassociative model to

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

8

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 4 | Effect of the number of stored patterns on valence
prediction. (A) Percentage of prediction errors of the standard
autoassociative and heteroassociative models. (B) Percentage of prediction
errors of the proposed model after one to four blocks of training trials.

(C,D,E) Details on the behavior of the proposed model trained on blocks of
100 patterns. (C) Prediction errors across 5 blocks of trials. (D) Rates of
interference detection over each block of trials. (E) Number of groups of
associated cells needed to resolve interference across the 5 blocks of trials.

maintain its performance on valence prediction as it was the
case without deletion (Figures 5B,D). These results also agree
with the prediction discussed above, that exteroceptive pattern
completion being performed prior to valence prediction in
the heteroassociative model makes it more accurate than the
autoassociative model, even when only a small number of
originally active cells is presented to the model. Similar functional
improvement is observed with the proposed model which is
inherently a heteroassociative model (Figures 5E,F). However,
the improvement is signiﬁcantly larger in the proposed model
because its learning is better even after one presentation of
training patterns.

occurred. The valence of these 10 patterns is then randomly
repeated or changed to positive or negative values. The model
was retrained on these patterns to allow it to adapt to valence
changes. Subsequently, the model is tested for valence prediction.
As shown in Figure 6, when both thresholds are set to 2, the
model produces prediction errors on about two-thirds of the
trained patterns. The model was not able to detect changes in
valence because exteroceptive patterns were recognized by the
model (HD = 0, see Figure 6B), so no learning has occurred. By
contrast, when valence threshold was set to 0 whatever the value
of exteroceptive threshold, 0 or 2, the model oﬀers an errorless
performance due to the successful detection of valence changes.

is

features

the number of

3.3. Phasing Storage and Recall
Since
grossly
exteroceptive
disproportionate to that of interoceptive features, our model
makes use of two novelty signals to mediate transitions between
storage and retrieval modes. These signals are generated
separately at
the level of exteroceptive patterns and their
associated valences. In this way the model can grant more
tolerance of exteroceptive errors than interoceptive errors while
being able to distinguish between diﬀerent conditions where
input patterns should be treated as novel.

To illustrate this behavior, the proposed model was initially
trained on a set of 10 patterns that were associated with neutral
valence. Whatever the values of novelty thresholds e and v
(e/v = 0/0, 2/2, 2/0), the model identiﬁed each of these patterns
as novel because the diﬀerence at the level of exteroceptive
patterns is much higher (see Figure 6B). Therefore, learning has

task of Levy-Gigi

3.4. Cue-Context Reversal Learning
Similarly to the
the
al.
et
proposed model, as well as
the standard autoassociative
and heteroassociative models, are applied to initially acquire a
discrimination between a set of positively or negatively valenced
patterns, and then to switch its choice following a reversal
at the level of cues or contexts in the original patterns. The
experimental design of the task is summarized in Table 3.

(2011),

In the ﬁrst phase of acquisition, the models are repeatedly
presented with the training patterns in the ﬁrst group and valence
prediction is evaluated over four blocks of four trials. As in
previous simulations, the order of training trials is randomized
within each block. There was no diﬀerence in the performance
of the three models during the acquisition phase (Figure 7A). All
the three models make correct valence prediction after a single
exposure to the training patterns.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

9

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 5 | Recall performance using partial cues. (A) Pattern
completion performance, deﬁned as the percentage of retrieved
patterns that differ from the stored patterns by one element at least, in
a standard autoassociative model
(M). (B) Valence prediction in the standard autoassociative model
and the heteroassociative model

(S) and a heteroassociative model
(S)

(M). (C,D) Pattern completion and

Valence prediction performances, deﬁned in terms of Hamming distance
between the stored and retrieved patterns in the standard
(M). (E,F)
(S) and the heteroassociative model
autoassociative model
(M+ACs, with ACs stands
Valence prediction in the proposed model
for associated cells) after one block of training trials (E) and after 4
blocks of training trials (F).

In the reversal phase, the models are exposed to new training
patterns from the second and third groups, in addition to the old
ones. The 12 training patterns are presented repeatedly four times
in random order across four blocks of trials. In the initial stage
after this reversal, valence prediction errors drastically increase
for all the three models (Figure 7A). This is quite expected
because more than 66% of the training patterns are new. It is

also obvious from the results of Figure 7A that valence prediction
errors are made for old patterns as well. This reﬂects the fact
that heteroassociative connections are irrelevantly strengthened
between the original patterns and valences of new patterns. The
proposed model detects all interference problems on the ﬁrst two
blocks of training trials after reversal and engages accordingly one
group of valence-associated cells to deal with interference eﬀects

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

10

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

FIGURE 6 | Effect of novelty thresholds on the performance of the
model. (A) Errors in valence prediction for different values of
exteroceptive (e) and interoceptive (v) thresholds. (B) Hamming distance

between input and output patterns before and after valence changes.
Hamming distance is calculated in overall (G) and separately for
exteroception (E) and valence (V).

TABLE 3 | The experimental design of the task of Levy-Gigi et al. (2011).

Training patterns

Task

Group 1

Group 2

Group 3

Phase 1

Phase 2

(Original)

(Cue reversal)

(Context reversal)

(Acquisition)

(Retention

A1+

B2+

C3−

D4−

E1−

F2−

G3+

H4+

A5−

B6−

C7+

D8+

Group1

and Reversal)

Group1

Group2

Group3

A–H refer to eight cue shapes, 1–8, eight contexts, + and − indicate respectively positive
and negative valences.

(Figure 7B). The standard autoassociative and heteroassociative
models, on the other hand, show impaired valence prediction
performance on the old patterns after learning the new ones. This
impairment persists over repeated trials since old exteroceptive
patterns become associated with both positive and negative
valence values.

4. Discussion

4.1. Autoassociative and Heteroassociative
Hippocampal Networks
The model proposed in this paper is developed to elucidate
neural mechanisms that might underlie the rapid, one-trial
learning of extero-interoceptive associations in the hippocampus.
The binding of exteroceptive features is accomplished, as it is
usually the case, through a separate autoassociative network,
subserving pattern completion of exteroceptive patterns. Along
with this ﬁrst autoassociative memory, a second one is
employed to serve a similar function for valence features.
The two autoassociative networks are interconnected through
heteroassociative links, allowing ﬂexible interactions between the
exteroceptive stimulus patterns and their associated emotional
valences.

FIGURE 7 | Simulation results of the reversal learning task of Levy-Gigi
et al. (2011). (A) Performance on valence prediction before and after cue and
context reversal learning using the standard autoassociative and
heteroassociative models (S/M) and the proposed model (M+ACs, with ACs
stands for associated cells). (B) Number of groups of associated cells needed
by the proposed model during acquisition and reversal phases.

synapses

By evidence of associative synaptic plasticity at most of
the hippocampal
(Andersen et al., 2007), auto-
and heteroassociative networks have already been validated
as prototypical models of
the
hippocampus. While autoassociative learning has long been
ascribed to CA3 because of its recurrent connections (Marr,
1971), heteroassociative learning has been reported to occur at
the Schaﬀer collaterals projecting from CA3 to CA1 (Miyata

the mnemonic function of

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

11

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

et al., 2013), at CA3 backprojections on hilar mossy cells and
DG granule cells (Lisman and Otmakhova, 2001). Recently, the
functional homogeneity of CA3 has been called into question
(de Almeida et al., 2007; Witter, 2007; Hunsaker et al., 2008;
Thompson et al., 2008; Bush et al., 2010). The CA3 subregions
(CA3a, b, and c) have been reported to exhibit distinct anatomical
and neurophysiological characteristics. In particular, Samura
et al. (2008) have proposed, based on the location dependency
of the recurrent collaterals of CA3, that both CA3a and CA3b act
as autoassociative memories while CA3c acts as heteroassociative
memory.

It has been argued that heteroassociative plasticity may
underlie the learning of memory sequences in the hippocampus
(Lisman and Otmakhova, 2001; Samura et al., 2008). It is also
plausible that the heteroassociative properties of hippocampal
synapses could serve, as suggested by our model, to facilitate
binding between diﬀerent kinds of information that may be
mediated by diﬀerent regions and circuitry in the hippocampus.
Some aspects in favor of this possibility will be discussed in
Section 4.2 below.

As opposite to the purely autoassociative way of binding
proposed by previous models (e.g., O’Reilly and Rudy, 2001;
Rolls, 2010), our model proposes that pattern completion
of exteroceptive patterns occurs prior to the prediction of
their emotional valences. This allows, as demonstrated by the
simulations in Figure 5, for more accurate predictions under
partial-cue recall conditions. Note that the validity of this
principle is evident for extero-interoceptive associations formed
outside the hippocampus. Projections from the hippocampus,
including those to the amygdala (Pitkänen et al., 2000), arise
mainly from CA1, that is, after completion of exteroceptive
patterns in CA3. This may be the reason why the eﬀect of partial-
cue removal on valence prediction has not received attention
in experimental studies. While this is accepted in principle,
such studies would be extremely useful to determine what type
of binding is used to integrate exteroceptive and interoceptive
information within the hippocampus. A good argument in favor
of the heteroassociative connectivity can be obtained if the
accuracy on valence prediction does not diﬀer signiﬁcantly as the
number of available cues decreases (up to 50% according to our
simulation results).

4.2. How does Interoceptive Information Reach
the Hippocampus?
It is known that sensory information from most unimodal and
polymodal associative cortical areas arrives at the superﬁcial
layers of the EC and passes to the hippocampus via the perforant
path (de Curtis and Paré, 2004). The axons of the perforant path
arise mainly in layers II and III of the EC; layer II neurons
project directly to the DG and CA3, while layer III neurons
project to CA1 hippocampal region (Andersen et al., 2007).
In primates, spatial information is conveyed to the superﬁcial
layers of the EC by the parahippocampal cortex (PHC) whereas
non-spatial information is conveyed by the perirhinal cortex
(PRC). According to this view, PRC which receives important
projections from the insular cortex (Craig, 2009) might also
convey interoceptive information to the hippocampus (Figure 1).

Notably, the transfer of sensory inputs from PRC to EC is
subject to long-range feedforward inhibition (de Curtis and Paré,
2004; Apergis-Schoute et al., 2007), that has been shown to be
counteracted by BLA glutamatergic projections to PRC and EC
(Paz and Paré, 2013). Such eﬀect was observed, for example, in
the case of the experiment reported by Paz et al. (2006) when a
reward is unexpectedly delivered, but attenuated with learning
when rewards occur as predicted. This suggests that BLA activity
may facilitate the transmission of emotional information under
certain conditions to the hippocampus (de Curtis and Paré,
2004).

In addition, unlike exteroceptive information, alternate
pathways may provide a route for interoceptive features to reach
the hippocampus (Andersen et al., 2007). Direct projections
from the insular and orbitofrontal cortices terminate in the
deep layers of the EC but they may contribute to the perforant
path through intrinsic deep to superﬁcial projections in the
entorhinal cortex. The amygdala, which may relay valence related
information, exclusively targets cells in layer III of the EC
(Canto et al., 2008). Both CA3 and CA1, but not the DG,
receive direct projection from BLA. The septum, which interacts
closely with limbic structures,
is another potential source
of interoceptive information that may reach all subdivisions
of
formation via ﬁmbria-fornix pathway.
This pattern of neuroanatomical connectivity argues for a
relative segregation between the processing of exteroceptive
and interoceptive information in the hippocampus. It is also
possible that distinct types of extero-interoceptive associations
are mediated by diﬀerent heteroassociative networks in the
hippocampus.

the hippocampal

The anatomical and neurophysiological characteristics of CA3
make it attractive as a candidate for the locus where one-
trial associations might be formed between diverse exteroceptive
and interoceptive inputs. The architecture of
the model
presented in this paper represents a minor departure from
the purely autoassociative models of CA3—since only a small
fraction of cells encoding valence are isolated from other cells
binding exteroceptive features in a homogeneous autoassociative
network. We assume that CA3a, where recurrent connections
is the best ﬁtted to the exteroceptive
are most prevalent,
autoassociative network in the model. But it is harder to predict
where the interoceptive autoassociative network might be located
as only very little is known about the distribution of valence
signals in the hippocampus. However, on the basis of the results
of Nakamura et al. (2013) about the presence of a proximal CA3-
distal CA1 network involved primarily in processing nonspatial
information, it is more likely that interoceptive information is
encoded in CA3b,c and/or CA1 of the ventral hippocampus.

Generally, CA3 has been identiﬁed to be more involved than
CA1 in the rapid encoding of a wide range of novel associations
aﬀorded by the hippocampus (Nakashiba et al., 2008; Kesner,
2013). Selective blockade of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors at CA3-CA3 synapses is associated with impairments
on single-trial learning tasks (Lee and Kesner, 2002), including
spatial tasks (Nakazawa et al., 2003), paired-associate learning
paradigms (Day et al., 2003), and fear memories (Zhang et al.,
2001; Quinn et al., 2005). Thus, it is likely that CA3 NMDA

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

12

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

receptor-mediated plasticity mechanisms generally contribute to
binding distinct aspects of one-trial experiences including their
interoceptive features.

Together, these data support our hypothesis that speciﬁc
subregions of CA3 and CA1, but not the DG, may constitute
speciﬁc processing nodes of interoceptive information within
the hippocampus. Under this view, we have suggested that
the hippocampus may recruit diﬀerent mechanisms by which
decorrelated representations can be established for exteroceptive
patterns and their associations to interoceptive patterns. This last
point is the focus of the next section.

4.3. Single-Trial Learning and Valence-Overload
Interference
In this paper, we have argued for a distinction between two
possible mechanisms by which the hippocampus may reduce
interference: (1) DG projections to CA3, as widely believed, are
necessary to enforce a new suﬃciently separated representation
cells, preventing (pattern-overload)
onto CA3 pyramidal
interference between the representations of exteroceptive
patterns stored autoassociatively in CA3, but (2) interference
between valences (valence-overload) is controlled by local
circuit interactions within CA3 (or probably CA1, cf. Section
4.2). The role of DG in pattern separation has been extensively
characterized in previous studies (Leutgeb et al., 2007; Myers
and Scharfman, 2009), which prompted us to concentrate more
on how to deal quickly with valence-overload interference,
especially under conditions involving one-time experiences.

The most obvious way would be to strengthen correct
associations between exteroceptive patterns and their emotional
valences and weaken incorrect associations. However, this runs
the risk of destroying previously acquired associations because of
the distributed, albeit fairly sparse, nature of the representations
of exteroceptive patterns. The model proposed here provides
an alternative mechanism that does not involve forgetting, but
exerts rather inhibitory eﬀects to resolve interference from
prior learned associations. In particular, the model assumes a
reciprocal interplay between groups of valence-associated cells,
mediated by excitatory and inhibitory connections such that only
cells in one group can ﬁre. When the prediction produced at
retrieval does not match the targeted valence, learning is directed
to the next group of valence cells that would later inhibit the
erroneous response of the former group during recall.

In support of this idea of functionally prewired groups of
valence cells are lineage studies demonstrating that clonally
related pyramidal cells are organized into discrete clusters
in the stratum pyramidale of the hippocampus (Grove and
Tole, 1999). More insights have recently been gained into the
developmental prewiring of hippocampal circuits (Xu et al.,
2014). In particular, as it is the case in our model, it has been
found that sister cells do not preferentially form direct contacts
with each other, but share common inhibitory inputs from nearby
fast-spiking interneurons. Selective connectivity like this suggests
that precise inhibitory microcircuits may account for speciﬁc
activity-dependent processes in the hippocampus.

By the same token, the diversity of excitatory and inhibitory
cells in CA hippocampal regions (Bilkey and Schwartzkroin,

the detection of

1990; Scharfman, 1993) may provide a potential substrate
for
interference and the processing of
emotional information in the hippocampus. In CA3c, pyramidal
cells display some morphological and electrophysiological
characteristics diﬀerent from pyramidal cells in other subregions
of CA3. Importantly, it has been found that these cells are
not as susceptible to be activated as other CA3 pyramidal
cells by stimulation of dentate mossy ﬁbers in hippocampal
slices (Scharfman, 1993). Diﬀerences in ﬁring patterns exhibited
by diﬀerent classes of pyramidal cells have been observed
experimentally in CA3b (Hemond et al., 2008). It is conceivable,
therefore, that special mechanisms may be in place to control
CA3 neural responsiveness to external inputs under speciﬁc
physiological conditions.

role

One may

hypothesize

potential
for
a
also
interference and the
neuromodulators in the detection of
processing of emotional
information in the hippocampus.
The projection pattern of all major neuromodulator systems
diﬀers along the septotemporal axis of the hippocampus, with
a higher density in the ventral hippocampus (Strange et al.,
2014). The magnocellular basal forebrain cholinergic system
sends eﬀerents that release ACh in all hippocampal regions. As
mentioned previously, and in line with our model, ACh has
been implicated in the regulation of oscillatory dynamics in the
hippocampus (Hasselmo et al., 1996; Hasselmo, 2006). Increased
release in ACh has been proposed to enhance the dynamics
of memory encoding by inhibiting synaptic transmission and
facilitating long-term potentiation (LTP) at speciﬁc connections,
which may reduce interference from previously encoded
memories during the learning of incoming inputs. Moreover,
levels of hippocampal ACh release have been demonstrated
to control amygdala function in fear conditioning allowing
for adaptive selection of the best predictive stimulus (simple
tone vs. context in Calandreau et al., 2006). The inﬂuence of
other neuromodulators, such as dopamine and norepinephrine,
is much less well understood but might be modality-speciﬁc,
allowing for diﬀerential encoding of nonspatial information in
the hippocampus (Ito and Schuman, 2012).

It is evident that a great deal remains to understand neural
processing of valence-related information in the hippocampus.
Yet, as a step in that direction, a testable prediction made
by our model
is that dentate pattern separation may be
needed to decorrelate highly similar exteroceptive patterns but
interference between valences may be detected and treated in CA
hippocampal regions relying on local inhibitory microcircuits.
However, valence-overload interference may not manifest until
the number of learned extero-interoceptive associations increases
considerably (cf. Section 3.1, Figure 4), due to high decorrelation
between hippocampal representations of exteroceptive patterns.

4.4. Role of Prediction-Error Signals in the
Hippocampus
In our model, we assume the existence of two novelty signals,
instead of only one, for the ability to identify situations in which
experiences are not novel but the prediction of their associated
valences is incorrect due to a faulty learning or a change in the
previously learned valences (cf. Sections 3.3, 3.4, Figure 6). This

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

13

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

view is in accordance with electrophysiological recording studies
showing that hippocampal cells diﬀerentiate between correct
and error responses immediately after the behavioral response
(Wirth et al., 2009), and with signiﬁcantly stronger signals in CA1
(Lee et al., 2012). However, the inﬂuence of prediction errors
on hippocampal network dynamics, as suggested in our model,
has not been examined in the literature. Thus, the relationship
between prediction errors and ACh level changes in the
hippocampus needs to be further tested empirically in the future.
This may also enhance our understanding of the interactions
between the hippocampus and other MTL structures, especially
the amygdala, as many studies (McIntyre et al., 2002; Calandreau
et al., 2006) suggest alterations in hippocampal ACh release as
a potential determinant of the relative contributions of MTL
structures in learning and memory.

In conclusion, the model proposed in this paper provides
an integrated view of how the hippocampus may integrate
exteroceptive and interoceptive information and raises the

possibility that local inhibitory microcircuits may be recruited
to deal with valence-overload interference under the constraint
of single-trial
learning of episodic memories. Extending our
model to include a dentate gyrus network mediating rapid
separation of the neural representations of exteroceptive patterns
will allow for more complex tasks to be simulated by the
model. A further question that remains for future work is
to explore how the model will actually operate, synergistically
and/or competitively, with other models supporting incremental
learning of extero-interoceptive associations. Such a study,
we believe, would help explain many puzzling observations
relative to hippocampal-dependent behaviors. These include, for
example, animal data showing that single- but not multiple-
trial contextual fear conditioning is impaired by hippocampal
lesions (Wiltgen et al., 2006), while damage to the hippocampus
after conditioning causes retrograde amnesia for contextual fear
memories regardless of training conditions (Sutherland et al.,
2008; Broadbent and Clark, 2013).

References

Andersen, P., Morris, R., Amaral, D., Bliss, T., and O’Keefe, J. (2007). The

Hippocampus Book. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Apergis-Schoute, J., Pinto, A., and Paré, D. (2007). Muscarinic control of long-
range gabaergic inhibition within the rhinal cortices. J. Neurosci. 27, 4061–4071.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0068-07.2007

Bast, T., Wilson,

I. A., Witter, M. P., and Morris, R. G. M.

(2009).
From rapid place learning to behavioral performance: A key role for the
intermediate hippocampus. PLoS Biol. 7:e1000089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.10
00089

Bennett, M. R., Gibson, W. G., and Robinson,

(1994). Dynamics of
ca3 pyramidal neuron autoassociative memory network in the
the
hippocampus. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 343, 167–187. doi:
10.1098/rstb.1994.0019

J.

Bilkey, D. K., and Schwartzkroin, P. A. (1990). Variation in electrophysiology and
morphology of hippocampal ca3 pyramidal cells. Brain Res. 514, 77–83. doi:
10.1016/0006-8993(90)90437-G

Broadbent, N. J., and Clark, R. E. (2013). Remote context fear conditioning remains
hippocampus-dependent irrespective of training protocol, trainingsurgery
interval, lesion size, and lesion method. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 106, 300–308.
doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.08.008

Bush, D., Philippides, A., Husbands, P., and O’Shea, M. (2010). Reconciling
the stdp and bcm models of synaptic plasticity in a spiking recurrent
neural network. Neural Comput. 22, 2059–2085. doi: 10.1162/NECO/a/00003-
Bush

Calandreau, L., Triﬁlieﬀ, P., Mons, N., Costes, L., Marien, M., Marighetto, A.,
et al. (2006). Extracellular hippocampal acetylcholine level controls amygdala
function and promotes adaptive conditioned emotional response. J. Neurosci.
26, 13556–13566. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3713-06.2006

Canto, C. B., Wouterlood, F. G., and Witter, M. P. (2008). What does the
the entorhinal cortex tell us? Neural Plast.

anatomical organization of
2008:381243. doi: 10.1155/2008/381243

Cenquizca, L. A., and Swanson, L. W. (2007). Spatial organization of direct
hippocampal ﬁeld ca1 axonal projections to the rest of the cerebral cortex. Brain
Res. Rev. 56, 1–26. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.05.002

Cohen, N. J., and Eichenbaum, H. (1993). Memory, Amnesia, and the Hippocampal

System. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Craig, A. (2009). How do you feel – now? the anterior insula and human awareness.

Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 59–70. doi: 10.1038/nrn2555

Day, M., Langston, R., and Morris, R. G. M. (2003). Glutamate-receptor-mediated
encoding and retrieval of paired-associate learning. Nature 424, 205–209. doi:
10.1038/nature01769

de Almeida, L., Idiart, M., and Lisman, J. E. (2007). Memory retrieval time and
memory capacity of the CA3 network: role of gamma frequency oscillations.
Learn Mem. 14, 795–806. doi: 10.1101/lm.730207

de Curtis, M., and Paré, D. (2004). The rhinal cortices: a wall of inhibition
between the neocortex and the hippocampus. Prog. Neurobiol. 74, 101–110. doi:
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2004.08.005

Dubreuil, A. M., Amit, Y., and Brunel, N. (2014). Memory capacity of
networks with stochastic binary synapses. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10:e1003727. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003727

Eichenbaum, H., Sauvage, M., Fortin, N., Komorowski, R., and Lipton,
(2012). Towards a functional organization of episodic memory in
lobe. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 1597–1608. doi:

P.
the medial temporal
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.07.006

Fanselow, M. S., and Dong, H. W. (2010). Are the dorsal and ventral
structures? Neuron 65, 7–19. doi:

functionally distinct

hippocampus
10.1016/j.neuron.2009.11.031

Gluck, M. A., Meeter, M., and Myers, C. E. (2003). Computational models of
the hippocampal region: linking incremental learning and episodic memory.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 269–276. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00105-0

Gluck, M. A., and Myers, C. E. (1993). Hippocampal mediation of stimulus
theory. Hippocampus 3, 491–516. doi:

representation: A computational
10.1002/hipo.450030410

Graham, B., and Willshaw, D. (1997). Capacity and information eﬃciency of
the associative net. Netw. Comput. Neural Syst. 8, 35–54. doi: 10.1088/0954-
898X/8/1/005

Grove, E. A., and Tole, S.

(1999). Patterning events and speciﬁcation
signals in the developing hippocampus. Cereb. Cortex 9, 551–561. doi:
10.1093/cercor/9.6.551

Hasselmo, M. E. (2006). The role of acetylcholine in learning and memory. Curr.

Opin. Neurobiol. 16, 710–715. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2006.09.002

Hasselmo, M. E., Wyble, B. P., and Wallenstein, G. V. (1996). Encoding and
retrieval of episodic memories: role of cholinergic and gabaergic modulation
in the hippocampus. Hippocampus 6, 693–708. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-
1063(1996)6:6<693::AID-HIPO12>3.0.CO;2-W

Hemond, P., Epstein, D., Boley, A., Migliore, M., Ascoli, G. A., and Jaﬀe,
D. B. (2008). Distinct classes of pyramidal cells exhibit mutually exclusive
ﬁring patterns in hippocampal area ca3b. Hippocampus 18, 411–424. doi:
10.1002/hipo.20404

Henke, P. G. (1990). Hippocampal pathway to the amygdala and stress ulcer
development. Brain Res. Bull. 25, 691–695. doi: 10.1016/0361-9230(90)90044-Z
Hobin, J. A., Ji, J., and Maren, S. (2006). Ventral hippocampal muscimol disrupts
context-speciﬁc fear memory retrieval after extinction in rats. Hippocampus 16,
174–182. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20144

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

14

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

Hunsaker, M. R., Rosenberg, J. S., and Kesner, R. P. (2008). The role of the dentate
gyrus, CA3a,b, and CA3c for detecting spatial and environmental novelty.
Hippocampus 18, 1064–1073. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20464

Moser, M. B., Moser, E. I., Forrest, E., Andersen, P., and Morris, R. G. (1995).
Spatial learning with a minislab in the dorsal hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 92, 9697–9701. doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.21.9697

Ito, H. T., and Schuman, E. M. (2012). Functional division of hippocampal area ca1
via modulatory gating of entorhinal cortical inputs. Hippocampus 22, 372–387.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.20909

Kennedy, P. J., and Shapiro, M. L. (2009). Motivational states activate distinct
hippocampal representations to guide goal-directed behaviors. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 106, 10805–10810. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0903259106

Kesner, R. P. (2013). A process analysis of the ca3 subregion of the hippocampus.

Front. Cell. Neurosci. 7:78. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00078

Kjelstrup, K. G., Tuvnes, F. A., Steﬀenach, H.-A., Murison, R., Moser, E. I.,
and Moser, M.-B. (2002). Reduced fear expression after lesions of
the
ventral hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 10825–10830. doi:
10.1073/pnas.152112399

Knoblauch, A., Palm, G., and Sommer, F. T. (2010). Memory capacities
for synaptic and structural plasticity. Neural Comput. 22, 289–341. doi:
10.1162/neco.2009.08-07-588

LeDoux,

J. E.

(2007). The amygdala. Curr. Biol. 17, R868–R874. doi:

10.1016/j.cub.2007.08.005

Lee, H., Ghim, J. W., Kim, H., Lee, D., and Jung, M. (2012). Hippocampal neural
correlates for values of experienced events. J. Neurosci. 32, 15053–15065. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2806-12.2012

Lee, I., Griﬃn, A. L., Zilli, E. A., Eichenbaum, H., and Hasselmo, M. E.
(2006). Gradual translocation of spatial correlates of neuronal ﬁring in the
hippocampus toward prospective reward locations. Neuron 51, 639–650. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2006.06.033

Lee, I., and Kesner, R. P. (2002). Diﬀerential contribution of nmda receptors in
hippocampal subregions to spatial working memory. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 162–168.
doi: 10.1038/nn790

Leutgeb, J. K., Leutgeb, S., Moser, M.-B., and Moser, E. I. (2007). Pattern separation
in the dentate gyrus and ca3 of the hippocampus. Science 315, 961–966. doi:
10.1126/science.1135801

learning, but not cue reversal

Levy-Gigi, E., Kelemen, O., Gluck, M. A., and Kéri, S. (2011). Impaired
context reversal
learning, in patients with
amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychologia 49, 3320–3326. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.08.005
and Redish, A.

and the
hippocampus. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 364, 1193–1201.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0316

(2009). Prediction,

sequences

Lisman,

J.,

Lisman, J. E., and Otmakhova, N. A. (2001). Storage, recall, and novelty detection
of sequences by the hippocampus: elaborating on the socratic model to account
for normal and aberrant eﬀects of dopamine. Hippocampus 11, 551–568. doi:
10.1002/hipo.1071

Maren, S. (2014). Fear of the unexpected: hippocampus mediates novelty-induced
return of extinguished fear in rats. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 108, 88–95. doi:
10.1016/j.nlm.2013.06.004

Marr, D. (1971). Simple memory: a theory for archicortex. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.

Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 262, 23–81. doi: 10.1098/rstb.1971.0078

Mather, M. (2009). When emotion intensiﬁes memory interference. Psychol. Learn.

Motiv. 51, 101–120.

McIntyre, C., Pal, S. N., Marriott, L. K., and Gold, P. E. (2002). Competition
between memory systems: acetylcholine release in the hippocampus correlates
negatively with good performance on an amygdala-dependent task. J. Neurosci.
22, 1171–1176.

Meeter, M., Murre, J. M., and Talamini, L. M. (2004). Mode shifting between
storage and recall based on novelty detection in oscillating hippocampal
circuits. Hippocampus 14, 722–741. doi: 10.1002/hipo.10214

Meeter, M., Myers, C. E., and Gluck, M. A. (2005). Integrating incremental learning
and episodic memory models of the hippocampal region. Psychol. Rev. 112,
560–585. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.112.3.560

Miyata, R., Ota, K., and Aonishi, T. (2013). Optimal design for hetero-
associative memory: hippocampal ca1 phase response curve and spike-
timing-dependent plasticity. PLoS ONE 8:e77395. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.00
77395

Moser, M. B., and Moser, E.

(1998). Functional diﬀerentiation in
the hippocampus. Hippocampus 8, 608–619. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-
1063(1998)8:6<608::AID-HIPO3>3.0.CO;2-7

I.

Moustafa, A. A., Myers, C. E., and Gluck, M. A. (2009). A neurocomputational
model of classical conditioning phenomena: a putative role for
the
hippocampal region in associative learning. Brain Res. 1276, 180–195. doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2009.04.020

Myers, C. E., and Scharfman, H. E. (2009). A role for hilar cells in pattern
separation in the dentate gyrus: a computational approach. Hippocampus 19,
321–337. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20516

Nakamura, N. H., Flasbeck, V., Maingret, N., Kitsukawa, T., and Sauvage, M. M.
(2013). Proximodistal segregation of nonspatial information in ca3: preferential
recruitment of a proximal ca3-distal ca1 network in nonspatial recognition
memory. J. Neurosci. 33, 11506–11514. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4480-12.2013
Nakashiba, T., Young, J. Z., McHugh, T. J., Buhl, D. L., and Tonegawa, S. (2008).
Transgenic inhibition of synaptic transmission reveals role of ca3 output in
hippocampal learning. Science 319, 1260–1264. doi: 10.1126/science.1151120
Nakazawa, K., Sun, L. D., Quirk, M. C., Rondi-Reig, L., Wilson, M. A.,
and Tonegawa, S. (2003). Hippocampal CA3 NMDA receptors are crucial
for memory acquisition of one-time experience. Neuron 38, 305–315. doi:
10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00165-X

Nolan, C. R., Wyeth, G., Milford, M., and Wiles, J. (2011). The race to learn: Spike
timing and stdp can coordinate learning and recall in ca3. Hippocampus 21,
647–660. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20777

O’Reilly, R. C., and Rudy, J. W. (2001). Conjunctive representations in learning and
memory: principles of cortical and hippocampal function. Psychol. Rev. 108,
311–345. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.108.2.311

Palm, G. (2013). Neural associative memories and sparse coding. Neural Netw. 37,

165–171. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2012.08.013

Paz, R., and Paré, D. (2013). Physiological basis for emotional modulation of
memory circuits by the amygdala. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 381–386. doi:
10.1016/j.conb.2013.01.008

Paz, R., Pelletier, J. G. G., Bauer, E. P., and Paré, D. (2006). Emotional enhancement
interactions. Nat.

of memory via amygdala-driven facilitation of rhinal
Neurosci. 9, 1321–1329. doi: 10.1038/nn1771

Pitkänen, A., Pikkarainen, M., Nurminen, N., and Ylinen, A. (2000). Reciprocal
connections between the amygdala and the hippocampal formation, perirhinal
cortex, and postrhinal cortex in rat: a review. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 911, 369–391.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06738.x

Quinn, J. J., Loya, F., Ma, Q. D., and Fanselow, M. S. (2005). Dorsal hippocampus
nmda receptors diﬀerentially mediate trace and contextual fear conditioning.
Hippocampus 15, 665–674. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20088

Rolls, E. (2013). The mechanisms for pattern completion and pattern separation in
the hippocampus. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 7:74. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2013.00074
Rolls, E. T. (2010). A computational theory of episodic memory formation in the
hippocampus. Behav. Brain Res. 215, 180–196. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.03.027
Rolls, E. T., and Xiang, J. Z. (2005). Reward-spatial view representations and
learning in the primate hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 25, 6167–6174. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1481-05.2005

Samura, T., Hattori, M., and Ishizaki, S. (2008). Sequence disambiguation
and pattern completion by cooperation between autoassociative and
heteroassociative memories of
functionally divided hippocampal CA3.
Neurocomputing 71, 3176–3183. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2008.04.026

Scharfman, H. E. (1993). Spiny neurons of area CA3c in rat hippocampal slices
have similar electrophysiological characteristics and synaptic responses despite
morphological variation. Hippocampus 3, 9–28. doi: 10.1002/hipo.450030103
Schmajuk, N. A., and DiCarlo, J. J. (1992). Stimulus conﬁguration, classical
conditioning, and hippocampal function. Psychol. Rev. 99, 268–305. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.99.2.268

Shohamy, D., Myers, C. E., Hopkins, R. O., Sage, J., and Gluck, M. A. (2009).
Distinct hippocampal and basal ganglia contributions to probabilistic learning
and reversal. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 21, 1821–1833. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21138

Smith, D. M., and Mizumori, S.

context-speciﬁc neuronal

J. (2006). Learning-related development
of
the
responses
hippocampal role in context processing. J. Neurosci. 26, 3154–3163. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3234-05.2006

and events:

to places

Steinbuch, K.

(1961). Die

lernmatrix. Kybernetik

1,

36–45.

doi:

10.1007/BF00293853

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

15

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

Kassab and Alexandre

Integration of exteroceptive and interoceptive information

Strange, B. A., Witter, M. P., Lein, E. S., and Moser, E. I. (2014). Functional
organization of the hippocampal longitudinal axis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15,
655–669. doi: 10.1038/nrn3785

Sugase-Miyamoto, Y., and Richmond, B. J. (2007). Cue and reward signals carried
by monkey entorhinal cortex neurons during reward schedules. Exp. Brain Res.
181, 267–276. doi: 10.1007/s00221-007-0926-z

Sutherland, R. J., O’Brien, J., and Lehmann, H. (2008). Absence of systems
consolidation of fear memories after dorsal, ventral, or complete hippocampal
damage. Hippocampus 18, 710–718. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20431

Tamamaki, N., and Nojyo, Y. (1995). Preservation of

topography in the
connections between the subiculum, ﬁeld ca1, and the entorhinal cortex in rats.
J. Comp. Neurol. 353, 379–390. doi: 10.1002/cne.903530306

Thompson, C. L., Pathak, S. D., Jeromin, A., Ng, L. L., MacPherson, C. R.,
Mortrud, M. T., et al. (2008). Genomic anatomy of the hippocampus. Neuron
60, 1010–1021. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.12.008

Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and Semantic Memory, Organization of Memory.

New York, NY: Academic Press.

van Groen, T., and Wyss,

J. M. (1990). Extrinsic projections from area
ca1 of the rat hippocampus: olfactory, cortical, subcortical, and bilateral
hippocampal formation projections. J. Comp. Neurol. 302, 515–528. doi:
10.1002/cne.903020308

Willshaw, D. J., Buneman, O. P., and Longuet-Higgins, H. C. (1969). Non-
holographic associative memory. Nature 222, 960–962. doi: 10.1038/222960a0
Wiltgen, B. J., Sanders, M. J., Anagnostaras, S. G., Sage, J. R., and Fanselow, M. S.
(2006). Context fear learning in the absence of the hippocampus. J. Neurosci.
26, 5484–5491. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2685-05.2006

Wirth, S., Avsar, E., Chiu, C. C., Sharma, V., Smith, A. C., Brown, E. N.,
et al.
in the
(2009). Trial outcome and associative learning signals
monkey hippocampus. Neuron 61, 930–940. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.
01.012

Witter, M. P. (2007). Intrinsic and extrinsic wiring of CA3: indications for
connectional heterogeneity. Learn. Mem. 14, 705–713. doi: 10.1101/lm.
725207

Xu, H.-T., Han, Z., Gao, P., He, S., Li, Z., Shi, W., et al. (2014). Distinct lineage-
dependent structural and functional organization of the hippocampus. Cell 157,
1552–1564. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.067

Zhang, W. N., Bast, T., and Feldon, J. (2001). The ventral hippocampus and
fear conditioning in rats: diﬀerent anterograde amnesias of fear after infusion
of n-methyl-d-aspartate or its noncompetitive antagonist mk-801 into the
ventral hippocampus. Behav. Brain Res. 126, 159–174. doi: 10.1016/S0166-
4328(01)00256-X

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2015 Kassab and Alexandre. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution and reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

16

June 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 87

