Who’s the teacher? Who’s the pupil?
Meropi Topalidou, Daisuke Kase, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Meropi Topalidou, Daisuke Kase, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier. Who’s the teacher? Who’s
the pupil?. Sixth International Symposium on Biology of Decision Making (SBDM2016), May 2016,
Paris, France. ￿hal-01347280￿

HAL Id: hal-01347280

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01347280

Submitted on 20 Jul 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Who's the teacher?
Who's the pupil?

Meropi Topalidou, Daisuke Kase, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier

Abstract Even though there was early interest in the neural basis of automatic behavior in the beginning of the
previous century, it is still unclear how we obtain and express habits. The dominant view of the 20th century was that
novel behaviors are generated by cortex, because they require attention and flexible thinking. Contrary, habits are
automatic, so they are primarily mediated by subcortical structures, more precise basal ganglia (BG). Nowadays, there is
arising bibliography that argues exactly the opposite position. So the essential question is "Who's the teacher and who's
the pupil?". Though our computational model of cortical-basal-thalamic closed loop, we show how learning has been
transferred from the basal ganglia to the cortex, simply as a consequence of the statistics of the choice. Our
theory was also tested on monkeys, which confirmed our predicted results.

Task For each trial, two cues are
presented. After the choice of a shape,
reward is delivered proportional to its
cue
fixed
symbols and probabilities remained the
same during a session.

probability. The

reward

Experiments

In each simulation (out of 1 20), the model was tested first for 1 00 trials with
Model
inactive the main output of BG, GPi (D1 ), using the same set of stimuli. After-wards, it was
tested for 1 20 more trials with active GPi (D2) this time, using the same set of stimuli as
previously. FInally, the GPi was suppressed (D3) once more and the model was tested on
the same stimuli for 1 20 trials.

Monkeys Two female macaque monkeys were tested on the task. 1 5 minutes before
working session, a solution was injected bilaterally in GPi: either saline in saline con-
in muscimol condition (MC). On day 1 , the two
dition (SC) or GABA agonist muscimol
monkeys were trained for 6 and 7 sessions respectively in MC; using the same set of stimuli
for each session. On day 2, the same number of sessions were conducted but in SC, using
the same set of stimuli as in day 1 .

ResultsModelUpperfigureshowsthatwhentheGPioutputissuppressed(D1),theperformanceofthemodelisrandomwitha50%probabilityofchoosingthebestcuethroughsession(chancelevel).However,afterGPiinhibitionhasbeenremoved,themodelinstantlyreachesaveryhighperformancelevel(D2).InthelasttestwithsuppressedGPiagain(D3),theperformancesremainmuchhigherthanchancelevel.MonkeysThelowerfigureshowsthatanimalsareunabletochoosethebeststimulusonD1(inMC),howeveritshowsadrasticchangeonbehavioronD2(inSC)whenanimalsstartswithnear-optimalperformanceonthefirst25trials.Themonkeyshaven'ttestedtothethirdconditionoftheprotocol(D3),butitispredictedtheirperformanestostayinahighlevel.ModelThemodelisbasedon[1,2]andorganizedalongthreesegregatedcortico-basal-thalamiccloseloops(motor,associativeandcognitive).Acompetitionmechanismwithineachco-rticalgrouphasbeenad-ded[3],byusingshortrangeexcitationandlongrangeinhibitions,ensuringauniquecognitiveandmotordecision.Learningoccursbetweenthecognitivecortexandstriatumthroughdopaminewhichmodulateslearningusingreinforcementlearning(RL;LTD&LTP).Hebbianlearning(HL;LTP)atcorticallevelhasalsobeenaddedbetweencognitiveandassociativecortex.Thislearningisenforcedoncepertrial,whenamovehasbeenmadeandindependentlyoftheactualreward.[1]M.Guthrie,A.Leblois,A.Garenne,andT.Boraud.Interactionbetweencognitiveandmotorcortico-basalganglialoopsduringdecisionmaking:acomputationalstudy.JournalofNeurophysiology,109:3025–3040,2013.[2]LebloisA.,BoraudT.,MeissnerW.,BergmannH.,HanselD.Competitionbetweenfeedbackloopsunderliesnormalandpathologicaldynamicsinthebasalganglia.JNeurosci26:3567–3583,2006.[3]PironC.,DaisukeK.,TopalidouM.,GoillandeauM.,N'guyenT.,OrignacH.,RougierN.P.,BoraudT.TheGlobusPallidusParsInternainGoal-OrientedandRoutineBehaviors:ResolvingaLong-StandingParadox.AcceptedinMovementDisorders.PythoncodeMembranePotential:SyhnapticInput:Hebbianlearning(1):ReinforcementlearningThemodelpredicts!Themonkeyconfirms!