A computational view of area 3b of primary somatosensory cortex Georgios
Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Georgios Detorakis, Nicolas P. Rougier. A computational view of area 3b
of primary somatosensory cortex. Twenty Second Annual Computational
Neuroscience Meeting : CNS 2013, Jul 2013, Paris, France. 14 (Suppl 1),
pp.P333, 2013. ￿hal-00842311￿

HAL Id: hal-00842311

https://inria.hal.science/hal-00842311

Submitted on 8 Jul 2013

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Detorakis and Rougier BMC Neuroscience 2013, 14(Suppl 1):P333
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/14/S1/P333

P O S T E R P R E S E N T A T I O N

Open Access

A computational view of area 3b of primary somatosensory cortex Georgios
IS Detorakis1,2*, Nicolas P Rougier3

From Twenty Second Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting: CNS*2013
Paris, France. 13-18 July 2013

We investigated the development of topologically orga- nized
representations of a restricted region of skin in the primary
somatosensory cortex (SI), more precisely, area 3b of SI. We devised a
computational model based on the dynamic neural field theory and on an
Oja-like learning rule at the level of feed-forward thalamocortical
connec- tions [1]. These connections reach area 3b through sub- thalamic
and thalamic relays that convey information from the Merkel Ending
Complexes (MECs), which are mechanoreceptors of the skin responsible for
information related to touch and pressure. They have been modeled as a
quasi-uniform grid while the rest of the relays have been neglected.
Both the critical and the post-critical periods of the SI development
[2] have been taken into consideration and the latter has been modeled
as a long-term alteration of lateral connections. During the critical
period, SI remains highly plastic and is able to cope with a vast num-
ber of alterations of the environment or of the body itself. This
condition goes on during the post-critical period but in a less
effective way [3]. In both periods SI is capable of reorganization in
the presence of a cortical lesion [4] (e.g. stroke) or a sensory
deprivation condition [5] (e.g. limb amputation). In order to examine if
the model is capable of recovery from lesions, both cortical and
sensory, we stu- died three different types of lesions on SI and on
skin. As expected, the model is able to cope with such degenerative
conditions and is able to recover a lot of the lost function- alities.
More precisely, in the case of cortical lesions, neu- rons that are not
affected can recover some of the lost representations while in the case
of sensory deprivation, neurons that have lost their preferred input,
tend to con- tribute to neighboring representations. Hence, the model
confirms both cases and the mechanism of balance between excitation and
inhibition seems to be the key for

* Correspondence: georgios.detorakis@inria.fr 1Computer Science,
University of Lorraine, Nancy, 54000, France Full list of author
information is available at the end of the article

recovery. Attention is another aspect that has been investi- gated
because of its prominent role in reshaping receptive fields during
execution of demanding touch perception tasks [6]. In this context we
simulated some attentional mechanisms in order to investigate how
attention affects the receptive fields of the model. In the presence of
an attentional signal, the model is able to gently adapt its receptive
fields according to the position of the stimuli on the skin. On the one
hand attention promotes the migra- tion of the distant receptive fields
towards the attended area and on the other hand proximal to attended
signal receptive fields undergo shrinkage.

Author details 1Computer Science, University of Lorraine, Nancy, 54000,
France. 2INRIA Nancy - Grand Est, Villers les Nancy, 54603 Cedex,
France. 3INRIA Bordeaux - Sud Ouest, Cours de la Liberation, 33405
Talence Cedex, France.

Published: 8 July 2013

References 1.

2.  

Detorakis GI, Rougier NP: Neural Field Model of the Somatosensory
Cortex: Formation, Maintenance and Reorganization of Ordered Topographic
Maps. PloS ONE 2012, 7:e40257. Gogtay N, Giedd JN, Lusk L, Hayashi KM,
Greenstein D, Vaituzis AC, Nugent TF, Herman DH, Clasen LS, Toga AW, et
al: Dynamic mapping of human cortical development during childhood
through early adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 2004, 101:8174-8179.

3.  Marik SA, Yamahachi H, McManus JNJ, Szabo G, Gilbert CD: Axonal

4.  

dynamics of excitatory and inhibitory neurons in somatosensory cortex.
PLoS Biology 2010, 8:e1000395. Sober SJ, Stark JM, Yamasaki DS, Lytton
WW: Receptive field changes after strokelike cortical ablation: a role
for activation dynamics. Journal of neurophysiology 1997, 78:3438-3438.

5.  Merzenich MM, Kaas JH, Wall J, Nelson RJ, Sur M, Felleman D:
    Topographic reorganization of somatosensory cortical areas 3b and 1
    in adult monkeys following restricted deafferentation. Neuroscience
    1983, 8:33-55. Hsiao SS, Vega-Bermudez F: Attention in the
    somatosensory system. The Somatosensory System: Deciphering the
    Brain’s Own Body Image Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2002, 197-217.

6.  

doi:10.1186/1471-2202-14-S1-P333 Cite this article as: Detorakis and
Rougier: A computational view of area 3b of primary somatosensory
cortex. BMC Neuroscience 2013 14(Suppl 1):P333.

© 2013 Detorakis and Rougier; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an
Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.


