From computational neuroscience to computational learning science:
modeling the brain of the learner and the context of the learning
activity Margarida Romero, Frédéric Alexandre, Lisa Roux, Gérard
Giraudon, Thierry

Viéville

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Frédéric Alexandre, Lisa Roux, Gérard Giraudon,
Thierry Viéville. From com- putational neuroscience to computational
learning science: modeling the brain of the learner and the context of
the learning activity. SophIA-summit 2020, Nov 2020, Sophia-Antipolis /
Virtual, France. 2020. ￿hal-03018617￿

HAL Id: hal-03018617

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03018617

Submitted on 23 Nov 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

From computational neuroscience to computational learning science:
modeling the brain of the learner and the context of the learning
activity.

Margarida Romero1, Frédéric Alexandre2, Lisa Roux1, Gérard Giraudon3,
Thierry Viéville2,1

1.  LINE research lab, Université Côte d’Azur, France
2.  Mnemosyne Inria Team, France
3.  EducAzur & Inria, France

In Computational neuroscience and bioinspired artificial intelligence
(AI), different studies aim at understanding the mechanisms of
perception such as shape recognition and sensori-motor coordination such
as grasping or pinching. A step further, as in the Mnemosyne research
program, cognitive mechanisms are analyzed to better understand brain
circuits responsible for reasoning and problem-solving, by a biological
or algorithmic agent.

Ill-defined problem engaging the participants in a task which goal
requires to explore the four unknown cubes placed in front of the
participant. The affordances are important in the process of
understanding the material and its features to configure it in a way to
solve the problem (goal state)

Goal : “build a vehicle moving from a red point to a black point”

even on simple tasks of problem-solving, we do not yet have a model that
encounters the underlying cognitive processes of the learner’s brain, in
link with the dynamic state of the activity system assessment that takes
place at the task level. ⇒ the AIDE research program aims to build such
models to better understand the interaction between brain processes and
problem-solving activity from a behavioral perspective analysed based on
learning analytics generated automatically, also through the human
analysis of this activity based on coding schemes.

COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE MODELING of executive functions allows to model
the learner involved in a precise learning task. For instance, the
prefrontal cortex encodes the outcome, or value, of an action
(orbitofrontal), while action decision making and working memory is
located in the dorsolateral part, in link with the basal ganglia for
action selection and action reward processing and other brain
Structures.

Considering this effective functional model of brain functions allows us
to provide an operational model of the learner behavior, in link with
machine learning algorithms, such as reinforcement learning.

MEASURING LEARNING ANALYTICS during unplugged or tangible playful
activities with low-cost devices in order to use them in concrete
learning environment:

From wikipedia

Here computational thinking competences related to algorithm, data
representation and information coding is targeted, in an autonomous
learning setup. Monitoring such activity influences the learning
paradigm, involving the learner in a learning to learn process.

T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

LINE research lab has developed a methodology for the analysis of human
creative problem-solving through a digital manipulative task-oriented
approach.

The French National Direction of Digital Education (DNE) at the Ministry
Of Education (MENJS) has selected the LINE research team for being
responsible of one of the 9 thematic workforces. The GTnum 9 is devoted
to the advancement of Artificial Intelligence in Education.


