Smart EdTech, a global community of practice for the sociocritical
development of artificial intelligence in education Oksana Strutynska,
Chengcheng Li, Dea Puspita Septiani, Margarida Romero

To cite this version:

Oksana Strutynska, Chengcheng Li, Dea Puspita Septiani, Margarida
Romero. Smart EdTech, a global community of practice for the
sociocritical development of artificial intelligence in education. 2024.
￿hal-04606079￿

HAL Id: hal-04606079

https://hal.univ-cotedazur.fr/hal-04606079

Preprint submitted on 9 Jun 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Smart EdTech, a global community of practice for the sociocritical
development

intelligence

artificial

education

of

in

Oksana Strutynska Université Côte d’Azur, France

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3555-070X

Chengcheng Li Université Côte d’Azur, France

https://orcid.org/0009-0000-3090-9539

Dea Puspita Septiani Université Côte d’Azur, France

https://orcid.org/0009-0001-9780-5782

Margarida Romero Université Côte d’Azur, France

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3356-8121

Abstract The emergence of Generative Artificial Intelligence (genAI)
necessitates a rapid evolution in university programs in educational
technologies. This paper introduces a sociocritical analysis of the AI
acculturation activities developed within the MSc Smart EdTech master.
This program supports edTech professionals, from instructional designers
to educators and entrepreneurs in edTech, to develop a critical
understanding of AI and creative uses of these technologies among master
students.

This paper adopts a dual perspective. Firstly, it acknowledges the
dichotomy within educational technology, catering to diverse user needs
encompassing both learners and educators. Secondly, it delves into the
inherent prioritization of learner agency in technology design,
potentially constraining teacher influence.

Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, Teachers’ Agency, Educational
Technology.

Introduction

Over the past years, the advancement of artificial intelligence (AI)
technologies, including machine learning, computer vision, and natural
language processing, has permitted the transformative uses of AI in
different domains. Its application to goods and services, as well as the
defense sector, is quickly emerging as a critical component of success
in the global marketplace. By the end of 2022, the McKinsey Global
Survey on AI revealed that the technology’s use was growing, with
adoption having more than doubled since 2017 (McKinsey Global Institute,
2022).

The McKinsey Global Institute conducted a study among corporate
representatives from 2018 to 2022, and the results show that AI
technologies are being used more and more in goods and business

operations. According to the World Economic Forum’s “The Future of Jobs
Report 2020,” AI is expected to replace 85 million jobs worldwide by
2025 (WEF, 2020).

Thus, AI is one of the scientific and technological sectors that is
advancing the fastest. The needs of the modern world, including the rise
of new professions in this area such as AI expert, AI engineer, or
Machine Learning Engineer, and the consequent need for qualified
professionals, are tied to preparing today’s students for the use of
such technology.

This implies that the need for AI specialists is already quite high. In
this context, it is important to explore how modern students can be
involved in the creative use of AI technologies for their education as
in professional activity and daily life. In education, the emergence of
generative AI technologies such as ChatGPT has introduced new learner
and teacher practices which require consideration of their educational
potential but also their ethical implications (Septiani et al., 2023).

AI as a current trend in education

In the current trends of education, AI has become a popular topic of
discussion for its impact on teaching and learning processes. Cardona et
al. (2023) argue that there are several positive impacts that AI may
bring that lead to the improvement of educational experiences. O’Toole
and Horvát (2024) observe that one of the potentials of AI to influence
is that when users’ creativity is combined with using AI-based tools, it
is suggested that it can lead to the possibility of users creating
content more deeply and maximizing potential in the creation’s process.
For example, the 2023 EDUCAUSE Horizon Report shows how AI-based
chatbots may improve self-learning processes in medical students because
“empathetic” chatbots are capable of mimicking patients (Pelletier et
al., 2023).

As AI becomes more integrated into educational settings, being aware of
AI and incorporating creativity are helpful factors in supporting
students and educators to navigate the use of AI (GEM Report UNESCO,
2023). It is then important to understand how AI operates and how it can
be used effectively to improve teaching and learning experiences (UNESCO
Digital Library, 2023).

Current digital competency frameworks integrate the need to develop a
certain understanding of algorithmic thinking and computational
thinking. However, the need to integrate AI literacy has been only
recently considered in some of them. Within the DigComp 2.2 European
Framework (Vuorikari et al., 2022) there is a reflection on the critical
uses of AI in education which points to a set of five objectives to
integrate AI in education. The requirements are based on the following
competencies:

● A. “What do AI systems do and what do they not do?” This competency
necessitates an understanding of the capabilities and limitations of AI
systems, enabling educators and learners to discern the scope and
boundaries of AI applications.

● B. “How do AI systems work?” This competency aims to support the
understanding of mechanisms and algorithms underlying AI functionality,
fostering a deeper comprehension of their operation.

● C. “When interacting with AI systems”. This competency focuses on
developing skills for deciding the moments (when) AI could be effective
for the teaching and learning process. ● D. “The challenges and ethics
of AI”. Addressing the challenges and ethical implications associated
with AI deployment, this competency prompts critical reflection on
issues such as bias, privacy, and accountability in AI systems.

● E. “Attitudes regarding human agency and control”. Exploring attitudes
toward human involvement and control in AI decision-making processes,
this competency encourages educators to consider the balance between
autonomy and oversight in AI-driven environments.

In their work on “How to Teach Artificial Intelligence”, VanderArk
(2020) identifies similar objectives, aiming first to understand how AI
systems work (perception, representation, machine learning, natural
interaction) but also their societal impact.

Figure 1

Framework for teaching AI in education (Vander Ark, 2020).

HyFlex education to acculturate edTech professionals to AIED

The Master of Sciences (MSc) SmartEdTech program is designed by using a
blended learning approach that combines two intensive weeks in Nice (in
October and April) with the rest of the coursework being completed
online.

The goal of the MSc SmartEdTech initiative is to provide a high-quality,
collaborative, and co-creative approach to digital education. For
professionals (designers, engineers, ergonomists, etc.) engaged in the
development of digital technologies for education (EdTechs) and the
education professionals who employ them, the curriculum tackles
contemporary social and economic challenges.

Figure 2

Activities developed within the MSc Smart EdTech program.

The MSc Smart EdTEch program has a high flexibility of learning
activities as represented in Figure 2. The pedagogical structure of the
program is conceived as a continuum, extending from traditional,
teacher-led instruction to dynamic, professionally-driven experiences.
The MSc Smart EdTech program develops a triple perspective in computer
science, learning sciences, and applied cognitive sciences. The program
also integrates instructional design, innovative pedagogies, and
interdisciplinary projects (Romero et al., 2020). Within computer
science education, students are engaged in game development with
AI-supported tools like Unity, the Digital Expertise course immerses
students in the realm of AI. Collaborations with esteemed partners like
Cocolab and AI for Emotion Recognition expand horizons, while intensive
week activities and workshops are spearheaded by entities like MIA and
Terra Numerica. Since 2023, the program integrates open educational
resources and practical activities with Maison de l’Intelligence
Artificielle (MIA) and Terra Numeria for AI in Education (AIED). This
allows us to prepare students for the challenges and use of AI in their
future professional activities. It will also give them an advantage in
their job search, as according to the Resume Builder (2023) 96% of
companies hiring in 2024 will prefer candidates with AI skills. This
student-centric phase of the curriculum is complemented by opportunities
for students to lead initiatives such as hackathons, workshops, and
conferences in technology-enhanced learning (TEL), but also
entrepreneurial activities. Moreover, internships ensure that
theoretical knowledge is seamlessly integrated with practical,
professional experience. Such activities not only bridge the gap between
academia and industry but also enable students to actively shape their
learning journey, aligning with the needs of the educational technology
(EdTech) sector. Collaboration among the diverse profiles of MSc Smart
EdTech students plays a crucial role in fostering the assimilation of AI
and the integration of educational practices in the field of education.
Some students have already gained experience in implementing AI in
education, whereas others rely solely on their personal experiences.
These students’ collaboration supports knowledge transfer and the
emergence of new creative uses of AI in education while considering the
ethical implications related to data representativity in the bias of AI
technologies. The co-design activities developed at the MIA offer a
playful context to experience different types of activities (image
recognition, AI-supported drones, AI-based social robotics), which
allows students from different backgrounds and AI competencies to have a
concrete experience and be able to co-design creative activities
supported by AI.

Figure 3

MSc Smart EdTech students at Maison de l’Intelligence Artificielle
(MIA).

The specific MSc Smart EdTech objectives for integrating AI tools and
the pedagogical potential of AI for education (AIED) have been defined
into five areas as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4

MSc Smart EdTech objectives in relation to AIED.

The first objective is to comprehend the fundamental principles of AI
and its potential in the field of AIED to improve decision-making
processes in teaching and learning processes. Acquiring this fundamental
information enables students to analyze and utilize AI capabilities in
educational environments with a critical mindset.

The second objective aims to support the development of digital content
facilitated by artificial intelligence (Ossiannilsson et al., 2024).
This involves utilizing artificial intelligence to create cutting- edge
and engaging learning materials, therefore enhancing the educational
environment with technologically advanced resources.

The third objective of the MSc Smart EdTech curriculum encourages the
utilization of artificial intelligence tools to facilitate collaborative
and innovative problem-solving. This purpose emphasizes the significance
of utilizing AI in both individual and group learning activities,
encouraging students to employ AI in manners that cultivate creativity
and collective intelligence.

The fourth objective, the program acknowledges the importance of
customization in education, promoting the utilization of artificial
intelligence to facilitate personalized learning experiences. The
program utilizes AI-driven mechanisms, including chatbots, Intelligent
Tutoring Systems (ITS), and gamification, to accommodate individual
learning styles, preferences, and speeds. This approach enhances learner
engagement and effectiveness.

Finally, the fifth objective of the MSc Smart EdTech program involves
the creation of a sociocritical evaluation of media to determine the
quality of information. This section focuses on the ethical aspect of
AIED, highlighting the importance of students critically assessing media
material and the impact of AI on the quality and spread of information.
This objective is in line with the goal of promoting responsible
utilization of technology in educational settings.

Study of creative uses and practices of AI in education for MSc Smart
EdTech students

To analyze what is the level of engagement of MSc Smart EdTech students
in using AI tools and how they understand AI in general we conducted the
survey using Google Forms (during April 2024 intensive week). This
target group consisted of 35 participants (51.5% - MSc Smart EdTech
students, 36.9% - educators and 11.6% - others (instructional designer,
NGO leader, manager in the field of online education). Responses of
self-evaluation of the survey participants’ experience with AI (“How can
you rate your experience with AI?”) are shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5

The self-evaluation of the participants’ experience with AI.

Responses on Figure 5 show that most participants need to improve their
experience with AI (11% of respondents have limited experience with AI
and 12% can’t answer or don’t have any experience with AI at all). For
this purpose, students take part in different activities and practicing
tasks related to the use of AI tools in education, professional
activities, and creative problem-solving during their studying. The
example of such an activity proposed is shown below.

We consider also the different levels of creative engagement in the use
of AI in education based on the #PPAI6 model in which the learner can
either be a passive consumer of AI content or be a co-creator with AI
technologies (Romero et al., 2023). Responses of self-evaluation of the
survey participants’ level of creative engagement with AI (“How can you
evaluate your level of engagement with AI?”) are shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6

The self-evaluation of the participants’ level of creative engagement
with AI.

The results on Figure 6 show that only 11% of the participants can use
AI in transformative activities in education. That means that we need to
propose such study cases that can develop students’ skills on using AI.

For deeper engagement MSc Smart EdTech students in creative
problem-solving with AI tools we designed practicing tasks “Missions
with using AI” and proposed them during the April 2024 intensive week.
For finding the solutions of problems students should had to choose
appropriate AI tools for every mission.

The example of the task is shown below in Figure 7. Students need to
find AI tools for solving ecological problems after destroying the
Kakhovka Dam during the wartime in Ukraine (finding people and animals,
delivering the food etc.).

Figure 7

The creative problem-solving practicing task with AI (Mission 1).

In Figure 8 we can see the gained results after solving this problem
with AI tools.

Figure 8

Solving problem task (Mission 1) with AI tools presented by 2 groups of
MSc Smart EdTech students.

As we can see from Figure 8, students proposed creative ideas to use AI
applications and tools for solving this problem, such as machine
learning tools for search patterns (i.e., teachable machines with
Google), infrared cameras for heat signature analysis, and computer
vision (i.e., built-in drones with AI), audio processing tools for
understanding animal sounds with machine learning (dog barking and
general animal sounds, for example, with the Bioacoustic AI tool),
natural language processing (NLP) for recognizing people’s sounds (i.e.,
teachable machines with Google), object detection, autonomous
navigation, predictive analytics, and others.

According to the Vander Ark model (2020), these activities enhance
students’ comprehension of how AI systems function. These activities
include the perception and analysis of problems that AI tools can solve,
the use of machine learning tools to train suitable AI models using
images, audio, or poses, the natural interaction of students with AI
tools, the representation of acquired data, and the impact of AI on
society, particularly in positive ways. The solution to such problems
also corresponds to the MSc Smart EdTech objectives for AIED (see Figure
4). In addition, creative problem-solving activities with AI tools can
also lead to developing competencies in critical uses of AI in education
(according to the DigComp 2.2 European Framework):

● Students interact with AI systems during the assignment (competence
“When interacting with

AI systems”).

● Students analyze capabilities and limitations of AI systems while
they are choosing appropriate AI tools for problem-solving (competence
“What do AI systems do and what do they not do?”). ● Students are
developing an understanding of how AI mechanisms and algorithms work
while they are training for example machine learning models (competence
“How do AI systems work?” ).

● The capabilities of AI systems and tools can also show students
negative ways of using AI, i.e.  training of AI models on biased data,
misinformation that can be caused by the use of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) such as ChatGPT, generative AI tools, etc. This
knowledge and experience allow students to develop such competencies as
“The challenges and ethics of AI” and “Attitudes regarding human agency
and control”.

We are confident that such tasks will lead to a better understanding for
students of what AI is and what capabilities of its use in education and
for creative problem-solving, as well as promote understanding and
skills of rational use of AI systems and technologies as a whole.

Discussion

The impact of AI on professional and educational practices shows a
significant potential for co-creative uses through a hybrid intelligence
approach (Järvelä et al., 2023; Romero et al., 2023). While AI has the
potential to revolutionize how people work, communicate, and interact
with technology, it also raises issues related to job displacement,
biases, and discrimination, as well as the potential for misuse or
abuse. The AI acculturation of students, such as the formative
interventions developed within the MSc Smart EdTech, allows us to
consider how AI literacy and acculturation can be developed in relation
to the educational objectives set by edTech professionals. In this
context, we need to consider AI acculturation of edTech professionals,
but also human values, including equity, freedom, privacy, security, and
responsibility. At the moment, no other technology poses a more thorough
and direct question for us to consider when deciding how and if we need
to incorporate this technology into the larger social context. Human
guidance in the AI acculturation is essential to support the critical
and ethical perspectives that can be developed in the process of AI
integration in education. In order to have a broader impact, the
acculturation and co-design activities within the MSc Smart EdTech
program are also shared with the public education system in the French
Riviera region and Terra Numerica. The learning materials are shared as
Open Educational Resources (OER). Empowering future EdTech
professionals, teachers, and parents through AI acculturation and
co-design activities is essential for fostering agency, ensuring that
the integration of AI in education is guided by ethical standards and
human values, ultimately leading to a more responsible and inclusive
technological future.

References

Cardona, M. A., Rodríguez, R. J., & Ishmael, K. (2023). Artificial
Intelligence and Future of Teaching and Learning: Insights and
Recommendations. U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational
Technology.

GEM Report UNESCO (2023). Global Education Monitoring Report 2023:
Technology in education: A tool on whose terms? (1st ed.). GEM Report
UNESCO. https://doi.org/10.54676/UZQV8501 Järvelä, S., Nguyen, A., &
Hadwin, A. (2023). Human and artificial intelligence collaboration for
socially shared regulation in learning. British Journal of Educational
Technology, 54(5), 1057- 1076.

McKinsey Global Institute (2022, December 6). The state of AI in 2022 —
And a half decade in review | McKinsey.
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantumblack/our-insights/the-state-of-
ai-in-2022-and-a-half-decade-in-review#/

Ossiannilsson, E., Cazarez, R. L. U., Goode, C., Mansour, C., & Gusmão,
C.M. G.D. (2024). Artificial Intelligence Use to Empower the
Implementation of OER and the UNESCO OER Recommendation (2). 16(2),
Article 2. https://doi.org/10.55982/openpraxis.16.2.650 O’Toole, K., &
Horvát, E.-Á. (2024). Extending human creativity with AI. Journal of
Creativity, 34(2),

100080. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjoc.2024.100080

Pelletier, K., Robert, J., Muscanell, N., McCormack, M., Reeves, J.,
Arbino, N., & Grajek, S. (2023).

2023 EDUCAUSE Horizon Report, Teaching and Learning Edition.

Resume Builder (2023, November 8). 1 in 3 Companies Will Replace
Employees With AI in 2024.
https://www.resumebuilder.com/1-in-3-companies-will-replace-

ResumeBuilder.Com. employees-with-ai-in-2024/

Romero, M., Lefèvre, S.-C., & Viéville, T. (2020). When a Master of
Sciences on EdTech becomes an

International Community. ERCIM News. https://doi.org/10/document

Romero, M., Isaac, G., Barma, S., Girard., M-A., Heiser, L. (2023).
Critical thinking, creativity, and

agency for the development of regenerative cultures. IRMBAM.

Septiani, D. P., Kostakos, P., & Romero, M. (2023). Analysis of Creative
Engagement in AI Tools in Education Based on the #PPai6 Framework. In Z.
Kubincová, F. Caruso, T. Kim, M. Ivanova, L. Lancia, & M. A. Pellegrino
(Eds.), Methodologies and Intelligent Systems for Technology Enhanced
Learning, Workshops—13th International Conference (Vol. 769, pp. 48–58).
Springer Nature Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-42134-1_5

UNESCO Digital Library (2023). Education in the age of artificial
intelligence — UNESCO Digital

Library. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000387029_eng

Vander Ark, T.

(2020, February 12). How To Teach Artificial

Intelligence. Forbes.

https://www.forbes.com/sites/tomvanderark/2020/02/12/how-to-teach-artificial-intelligence/

Vuorikari, R., Kluzer, S., & Punie, Y. (2022, March 17). DigComp 2.2:
The Digital Competence Framework for Citizens - With new examples of
knowledge, skills and attitudes. JRC Publications Repository.
https://doi.org/10.2760/115376

WEF

(2020).

Jobs https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_Jobs_2020.pdf

Future

The

of

Report

2020. 


