Higher Cognitive Functions in Bio-Inspired Artificial
Intelligence
Frédéric Alexandre, Xavier Hinaut, Nicolas P. Rougier, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Xavier Hinaut, Nicolas P. Rougier, Thierry Viéville. Higher Cognitive Functions
in Bio-Inspired Artificial Intelligence. ERCIM News, 2021, Special topic ”Brain inspired computing”,
125. ￿hal-03189215￿

HAL Id: hal-03189215

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03189215

Submitted on 2 Apr 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Higher Cognitive Functions in Bio-Inspired Artificial 

Intelligence 

by Frédéric Alexandre, Xavier Hinaut, Nicolas Rougier and Thierry Viéville (Inria, France) 

Major algorithms from artificial intelligence (AI) lack higher cognitive functions such as 

problem solving and reasoning. By studying how these functions operate in the brain, we can 

develop a biologically informed cognitive computing; transferring our knowledge about 

architectural and learning principles in the brain to AI. 

Digital techniques in artificial intelligence (AI) have been making enormous progress and offer 

impressive performance for the cognitive functions they model. Deep learning has been primarily 

developed for pattern matching, and extensions like Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks can 

identify and predict temporal sequences. Adaptations to other domains, such as deep reinforcement 

learning, allow complex strategies of decision-making to be learnt to optimise cumulated rewards. 

Contrary to human performance, these techniques require large training corpora and long training 

times. These challenges can be partly addressed by increasing data storage and computing power 

capacities. But another major flaw is less often mentioned: all the underlying cognitive functions are 

rather elementary and do not correspond to what is generally considered as human intelligence. The 

questions are thus: how is it possible to implement prospective reasoning and planning with these 

techniques? What about problem solving and creativity? Together with neuroscientists, we are 

studying the principles of brain organisation and memory network interactions (Figure 1). The main 

goal of our work, which takes place in the Mnemosyne Inria lab at the Bordeaux Neurocampus, is to 

transfer major experimental findings to new models of AI, capable of such higher cognitive functions. 

We started by modelling the loops between the frontal cortex and the basal ganglia, known to play a 

major role in decision-making and in the acquisition of skills [1]. This has led us to propose that a 

major distinction should be made between two kinds of loops. Loops involving agranular areas of the 

frontal cortex, which have been well studied in rodents, are responsible for learning sensorimotor 

skills and stimulus-driven decision-making. These loops can be related to elementary cognitive 

functions described above, providing immediate responses to external cues, and internal 

reinforcement. In contrast, granular frontal regions present in primates, which have not been so well 

studied, are generally associated with what is called meta-cognition. Here, the same learning 

principles are applied to the history of performance of the elementary functions to decide which of 

these elementary functions are triggered, inhibited or updated, in a given context. This process yields 

contextual flexibility and rapid updating, as observed in higher cognitive functions. 

From a modelling point of view, this organisation of architecturally similar loops is very interesting 

because it implies that similar computing principles (implemented in the circuitry of cortico-basal 

loops) are exploited on different kinds of information to implement different kinds of behaviour 

(reflexive and reflective). We are, for example, investigating the possibility of basing decisions on the 

mechanisms of working memory [2], which represents a history of past activity, instead of decisions 

being made based on the activity itself. Likewise, decisions between different strategies can be made 

from levels of confidence estimated from previous experiences, instead of simply deciding from 

actual rewards. Still relying on architectural similarities, future work could be dedicated to the 

processing of temporal sequences: Projections of agranular frontal areas to the parietal cortex 

implement the temporal chaining of sensorimotor skills and homologous projections from the granular 

frontal areas are reported to play a role in sequential subgoal decomposition. 

In addition, studying the projections from the hippocampus to the cortico-basal loops has given us 

important insights that can help us address another major problem related to prohibitive computational 

times for learning skills and decision criteria. The hippocampus is reported to be the place of episodic 

learning, storing past episodes and learning to replay them to train semantic and procedural memory. 

In neuroscience, this has been shown to be a major way to accelerate learning for the latter kinds of 

memory. We are currently working on computational models in this area, which are adapted to both 

improve learning time and decrease the size of the training corpora needed. In addition, the 

hippocampus is known to perform rapid and arbitrary binding of information. It has been proposed 

that the hippocampus in association with the frontal cortex can build prospective memory, also called 

imagination, which is fundamental for planning in the future. This is another area that we intend to 

study. 

Here we have sketched a brief overview of the cerebral architecture responsible for higher cognitive 

functions and have explained that knowledge in neuroscience is already available to transfer 

computing principles to AI. Interestingly, this cerebral architecture is tightly associated with brain 

regions responsible for elementary cognitive functions related to sensorimotor processing and 

reinforcement learning. This research program can consequently be seen as an extension of existing 

models in AI. A more general reference to the nervous system [3] provides the anchoring of these 

models in the perceptual, bodily, emotional and motivational dimensions of behaviour, thus providing 

direct links for the robotic implementation of autonomous agents, which we are also investigating. On 

a different note, accessing higher cognitive functions also corresponds to manipulating structured 

knowledge representations and mechanisms of abstract reasoning, which are classically studied in 

symbolic AI. This opens unique perspectives into the study of the emergence of meaning and internal 

thought, which apply to the domains of natural language processing and educational science. 

Links: 

http://www.imn-bordeaux.org/en/teams/mnemosyne-mnemonic-synergy/ 

References: 

[1]: Boraud, T., Leblois, A., & Rougier, N. P. (2018). A natural history of skills. Progress in 

Neurobiology, 171, 114-124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.08.003 

[2]: Strock, A., Hinaut, X., & Rougier, N. P. (2019). A Robust Model of Gated Working Memory. 

Neural Computation, 32(1), 153-181. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco\_a\_01249 

[3]: Alexandre, F. A global framework for a systemic view of brain modeling. Brain Inf. 8, 3 (2021). 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s40708-021-00126-4 

Hippocampus

CA3

Enthorinal Cortex

CA1 / Subiculum

Dentate Gyrus

Postrhinal Cortex

Perirhinal Cortex

Frontal Cortex

Sensory Cortex

vmPFC
Like

dmPFC
Need

dlPFC
vlPFC

FEF
Choose

motor
Do

Proprioception
Parietal
How

Location
Parietal
Where

Multimodal 
association

Interoception
Insula
Why

Exteroception
Temporal
What

Motor Thalamus

Sensory Thalamus

Basal Ganglia

Extracortical

Shell
NAcc

Core
NAcc

DMS

DLS

DLS

VTA

SNC

VP

GPi

SNr

m
u

l
l

e
b
e
r
e
C

r
o
i
r
e
p
u
S

l

s
u
u
c

i
l
l

o
C

-
o
p
y
H

s
u
m
a
a
h
t

l

l

a
a
d
g
y
m
A

Figure 1: 

This global architecture of the brain can be considered to be made of five cortico-basal loops and their 

main afferents from hippocampus and other extra-cortical structures. The three most central loops, 

which implement higher cognitive functions, include granular frontal areas. 

 
 
