Towards computational learning science: modeling
creative problem solving in child-robot interaction
through behavioral learning analytics
Margarida Romero, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Frédéric Alexandre. Towards computational learning science: modeling creative
problem solving in child-robot interaction through behavioral learning analytics. ISLS 2023 - Annual
Meeting of the International Society of the Learning Sciences, Jun 2023, Montréal, Canada.
￿hal-
04124474￿

HAL Id: hal-04124474

https://hal.science/hal-04124474

Submitted on 10 Jun 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - ShareAlike 4.0 International
License

Towards computational learning science: modeling creative problem 
solving in child-robot interaction through behavioral learning analytics

Margarida Romero 1,2\*, Frédéric Alexandre 2

\* margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr / https://margaridaromero.blog/ 
1. LINE & NeuroMod, Université Côte d’Azur, France
2. Mnemosyne Inria Team, France

#CreaCube Big data corpus of creative problem-solving tasks (n>1300 experiments).
Each video is coded based on a behavioral learning analytics coding schema

In computational neuroscience 
and bioinspired artificial 
intelligence (AI), different studies aim 
at understanding the mechanisms of 
perception such as shape recognition and 
sensori-motor coordination such as grasping 
or pinching. A step further, as in the 
Mnemosyne research program, cognitive 
mechanisms are analyzed to better 
understand brain circuits responsible for 
reasoning and problem-solving by a biological 
or algorithmic agent.

We engage the participants in an ill-defined 
problem-solving task whose goal requires them to 
explore the four unknown cubes placed in front of them. 
The affordances are important in the process of 
understanding the material and its features to configure it 
in a way to solve the problem (the goal state).

Goal : “Build a vehicle 
moving from a red point 
to a black point” 

The ANR CreaMaker and AIDE projects aim to better understand creative problem solving by analyzing the interaction between brain processes 
and problem-solving activity from a behavioral perspective. The CPS behavior (intentions + CPS regulation) is analyzed based on learning analytics 
generated automatically and also through human analysis of this activity based on coding schemes.

#CreaComp is a research program in computational learning sciences 
for the advancement of the study of creative problem solving.

Levels of analysis of creativity (Romero, 2022) based on Lodge et al. (2017)

CPS regulation (Romero, 2022)

MSc SmartEdTech is an 
international master's 
program in edtech.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Devoted 
to Education (AIDE) is an INRIA 
exploratory action aiming to 
advance the study of problem 
solving from a computational 
learning sciences perspective.

IDEX UCAJedi for Ukrainian 
researchers. Collaboration 
with Prof. Strutynska to 
evaluate wartime stress CPS, 
including learners in Kyiv and 
Ukrainian refugees in France.

The Horizon AugMENTOR 
project adopts augmented 
intelligence to develop 
collaborative learning 
paths.

The GTnum #Scol\_ia aims 
to advance the study of 
teachers’ and learners’ 
digital competencies 
required in the AI era.

The ANR CreaMaker project 
aims to advance the study 
of individual and collective 
creative problem solving 
through educational 
robotics.

Six levels of creative engagement in AI in Education (#PPai6)

 2023 @MargaridaRomero, @SylvieBarma, @SimonDuguay3, @isaac\_guillaume, @cduret, @LochrisH & @Viv\_LllLake

 
