Identification of distinct pathological signatures induced by
patient-derived α-synuclein structures in non-human primates M.
Bourdenx, A. Nioche, S. Dovero, M.-L. Arotcarena, S. Camus, G. Porras,

M.-L. Thiolat, N P Rougier, A. Prigent, P. Aubert, et al.

To cite this version:

M. Bourdenx, A. Nioche, S. Dovero, M.-L. Arotcarena, S. Camus, et al..
Identification of distinct pathological signatures induced by
patient-derived α-synuclein structures in non-human primates. Science
Advances , 2020, 6 (20), ￿10.1101/825216￿. ￿hal-04264868￿

HAL Id: hal-04264868

https://hal.science/hal-04264868

Submitted on 30 Oct 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15 16

17

18

19 20

21 22

23

24 25

26 27

28 29

30 31

32

33 34

35 36

37 38

39

40

Identification of distinct pathological signatures induced by
patient-derived a-

synuclein structures in non-human primates

Authors : M. Bourdenx1,2,†,‡, A. Nioche1,2,3,4,†, S. Dovero1,2,†, M.-L.
Arotcarena1,2,†, S. Camus1,2,

G. Porras1,2, M.-L. Thiolat1,2, N. P. Rougier1,2,5, A. Prigent6, P.
Aubert6, S. Bohic7, C. Sandt8, F.

Laferrière1,2, E. Doudnikoff1,2, N. Kruse9, B. Mollenhauer9, S.
Novello10,11, M. Morari10,11, T. Leste-

Lasserre12, I. Trigo Damas13,14, M. Goillandeau1,2, C. Perier14,15, C.
Estrada16,17, N. Garcia-

Carrillo18, A. Recasens14,15, N. N. Vaikath19, O. M. A. El-Agnaf19, M.
Trinidad Herrero16,17, P.

Derkinderen6, M. Vila14,15,20,21, J. A. Obeso13,14, B. Dehay1,2,* § and
E. Bezard1,2,*§

Affiliations:

1 Univ. de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293,
F-33000 Bordeaux, France;

2 CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, F-33000
Bordeaux, France;

3 Institut Jean Nicod, Département d’études cognitives, ENS, EHESS, PSL
Research University, 75005 Paris, France;

4 Institut Jean Nicod, Département d’études cognitives, CNRS, UMR 8129;

5 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 33405 Talence, France;

6 Inserm, U913, Nantes F-44035, France; Nantes University, Nantes
F-44035, France; CHU Nantes, Department of Neurology, Nantes F-44093,
France;

7EA-7442 Rayonnement Synchrotron et Recherche Medicale, RSRM,University
of Grenoble Alpes , 38000 Grenoble, France ;

8 SMIS beamline, Synchrotron SOLEIL, l’orme des merisiers, 91192 Gif sur
Yvette, France;

9Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Kassel, Germany; University Medical Center
Goettingen, Institute of Neuropathology, Goettingen, Germany;

10Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Pharmacology, University of
Ferrara, via Fossato di Mortara 17- 19, 44121 Ferrara, Italy;

11Neuroscience Center and National Institute of Neuroscience, University
of Ferrara, via Fossato di Mortara 17- 19, 44121 Ferrara, Italy;

12INSERM, Neurocentre Magendie, U1215, Physiopathologie de la Plasticité
Neuronale, F-33000 Bordeaux, France;

13HM CINAC, HM Puerta del Sur and CEU-San Pablo University Madrid,
E-28938 Mostoles, Spain;

14Center for Networked Biomedical Research on Neurodegenerative Diseases
(CIBERNED), Instituto Carlos III, Spain;

15Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Group, Vall d’Hebron Research
Institute (VHIR)-Center for Networked Biomedical Research on
Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED), Barcelona, Spain;

16Clinical and Experimental Neuroscience Unit, School of Medicine,
Biomedical Research Institute of Murcia (IMIB), University of Murcia,
Campus Mare Nostrum, 30071 Murcia, Spain;

17Institute of Research on Aging, School of Medicine, University of
Murcia, 30071 Murcia, Spain;

18Centro Experimental en Investigaciones Biomédica (CEIB), Universidad
de Murcia, Murcia, Spain;

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

19Neurological Disorders Research Center, Qatar Biomedical Research
Institute (QBRI), Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Education City,
Qatar;

20Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Autonomous
University of Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain;

21Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA),
Barcelona, Spain.

*To whom correspondence should be addressed to: Dr. Benjamin Dehay and
to Dr. Erwan Bezard, Institute of

Neurodegenerative Diseases, Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR 5293,
Centre Broca Nouvelle-Aquitaine, 146

rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux cedex, France. E-mail:
benjamin.dehay@u-bordeaux.fr (B.D.) and

erwan.bezard@u-bordeaux.fr (E.B.)

† These authors contributed equally to this work

§ BD and EB are co-last authors

‡ Present address: Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Department of
Developmental and Molecular Biology.

1300 Morris Park Ave. Bronx, NY, 10461, USA.

41 42

43 44

45 46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

73

ABSTRACT

Dopaminergic neuronal cell death, associated with intracellular
α-synuclein (α-syn)-rich protein

aggregates (termed ‘Lewy bodies’), is a well-established characteristic
of Parkinson’s disease.

Much evidence, accumulated from multiple experimental models has
suggested that α-syn plays a

role in PD pathogenesis, not only as a trigger of pathology but also as
a mediator of disease

progression through pathological spreading. Here we have used a machine
learning-based approach

to identify unique signatures of neurodegeneration in monkeys induced by
distinct α-syn pathogenic

structures derived from PD patients. Unexpectedly, our results show
that, in non-human primates,

a small amount of singular α-syn aggregates is as toxic as larger
amyloid fibrils present in the LBs,

thus reinforcing the need for preclinical research in this species.
Furthermore, our results provide

evidence supporting the true multifactorial nature of PD as multiple
causes can induce similar

outcome regarding dopaminergic neurodegeneration.

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

INTRODUCTION

The seminal work of Braak and colleagues suggesting that Lewy body (LB)
pathology follows a

predictable pattern of progression within the brain in Parkinson’s
disease (PD) (1) as well as the

‘host-to-graft’ observation (2-4) led to the development of experimental
models based on injection

with a-synuclein (a-syn – the primary protein component of LB)
assemblies (5-7). These

experimental models suggest that a-syn, in pathological conformations
such as the one found in

LBs, initiates a cascade of events leading to dopaminergic neuron
degeneration as well as cell-to-

cell propagation of a-syn pathology through a self-templating mechanism.

Several studies have suggested that pre-fibrillar oligomers may
represent one of the major

neurotoxic entities in PD (8, 9). This notion has been derived primarily
from studies using large

doses of recombinant a-syn applied to cell cultures or injected into
adult mice, over-expressing

either mutant or wild-type a-syn (10). In agreement with these findings,
we have shown that

intracerebral injection of low doses of α-syn-containing LB extracts,
purified from the substantia

nigra, pars compacta (SNpc) of postmortem PD brains, promotes α-syn
pathology and

dopaminergic neurodegeneration in wild-type mice and non-human primates
(11). Importantly, this

neuropathological effect was directly linked to the presence of a-syn in
LB extracts, since immuno-

depletion of α-syn from the LB fractions prevented the development of
pathology following

injection into wild-type mice.

In this study, our aim was to thoroughly investigate this experimental
model of synucleinopathy in

non-human primates. The initial study design was to administrate
fractions derived from the same

PD patients containing either soluble and small a-syn aggregates
(hereafter named noLB) or LB-

type aggregates (hereafter named LB). However, because of the unexpected
finding that non-

human primates, unlike mice, are susceptible to soluble or finely
granular a-syn, we sought to

elucidate the response characteristics induced by either LB or noLB
fractions. To achieve a

thorough analysis of these a-syn-related characteristics, we took
advantage of the strength of

machine-learning algorithms for discovering fine patterns among complex
sets of data and

developed a new method compatible with the constraints of experimental
biology. We here report

the identification of primate-specific responses to selected a-syn
assemblies associated with

different pathogenic mechanisms. Overall, our results support the
concept of the multifactorial

nature of synucleinopathies.

87 88 89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

120 121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

RESULTS Purification and characterization of α-synuclein extracts from
PD patients

NoLB and LB fractions were obtained from the SNpc of five sporadic PD
brains exhibiting

conspicuous LB pathology. The samples were processed through
differential ultracentrifugation in

a sucrose gradient, and analyzed for the presence of α-syn aggregates by
filter retardation assay

(Fig. 1A) (11). Further characterization of noLB and LB fractions was
performed by co-localization

of α-syn and the amyloid dye Thioflavin S (Fig. 1B) as well as
ultrastructural examination by

electron microscopy (Fig. 1C). These assays confirmed the presence of
misfolded a-syn in both

fractions. We also performed biochemical characterization of the
stability of assemblies after

proteinase K digestion (Fig. 1D) and detergent treatments (Fig. 1E)
followed by a-syn dot-blot

assays. While total α-syn content was comparable between selected
fractions (as measured by α-

syn ELISA), LB fractions showed higher resistance to proteinase K
treatment (noLB

t1/2=15.23minutes vs LB t1/2>60minutes) (Fig. 1D) as well as greater
resistance to multiple

detergents, including 8M Urea (Fig. 1E). We then measured the content of
a-syn aggregates using

human a-syn aggregation TR-FRET-based immunoassay, which revealed a
significantly higher

amount of aggregated a-syn in LB fractions (Fig. 1F). To obtain insight
into the content of

monomeric and aggregated a-syn within noLB and LB fractions of PD
patients, sarkosyl treatment

was applied to both fractions to induce physical separation, and then
velocity sedimentation and

density floatation gradients were performed to quantify these two
respective populations and

determine their relative abundance in each fraction (Fig. S1 A-H).
Strikingly, while LB fractions

contained ~90% of aggregated a-syn, noLB fractions were composed of ~10%
of this pathological

form of the protein (Fig. S1 I). Also, in order to confirm the quality
of the LB extraction, we

performed a filter retardation assay which showed that LB fractions, but
not noLB fractions, were

highly enriched in known components of LBs, such as phosphorylated S129
a-syn, ubiquitin, p62,

hyperphosphorylated tau and Ab (Fig. S2 A).

Micro-Infrared Spectroscopy of LB and noLB fractions was performed to
show conformational

changes in amyloid structures at the molecular level (Fig. S2 B-E) and
this confirmed the presence

of b-sheet structures in both assemblies (Fig. S2 B-C). Although their
velocity of sedimentation

and density floatation characteristics were similar, the aggregates
present in the LB and noLB

fractions were different in nature based upon the evidence of
Micro-Infrared Spectroscopy.

Principal component analysis (PCA) showed that, in the LB fractions,
large aggregates

corresponding to the major pieces of LB were present (Fig. S2D, cluster
on the right). PCA further

showed that, in the range of 1,590-1,700 cm-1, the LB group contained a
fraction of amyloid

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

aggregates with different amyloid structures from those in the noLB
group as they clearly

segregated by PCA in two clusters (Fig. S2 D-E). Altogether, these
results suggest that while LB

fractions primarily contained large aggregated a-syn fibrils, noLB
fractions contained soluble a-

syn and a smaller enrichment of a-syn aggregates featuring a specific
amyloid structure not found

in the LB fractions.

Data from several studies suggest that both recombinant α-syn preformed
fibrils (12-14) and

patient-derived α-syn (11) can promote pathogenic templating of
endogenous a-syn ultimately

leading to dopaminergic neurodegeneration in SNpc. Following
quantification by ELISA, both

mixes of fraction were diluted to ~24 pg a-syn per microliter. Then,
those fractions were tested for

their pathogenic effects on TH-positive dopaminergic neurons in primary
mesencephalic cultures

(Fig. S3 A) as well as in vivo in wild-type mice. Four months after
supranigral injection, LB-injected

mice displayed, as expected, significant dopaminergic degeneration,
while noLB injections in mice

had no impact on dopaminergic neurons (Fig. 1G-H) as we have previously
reported for other

SNpc-derived LB fractions (11), thus validating the toxicity of the
preparation prior to injection

into non-human primates.

Intrastriatal injection of LB and noLB fractions from Parkinson’s
disease patients induces

nigrostriatal neurodegeneration in baboon monkeys

To determine the mechanisms of a-syn aggregates toxicity in a species
closer to humans, adult

baboon monkeys (n=4-7 per experimental group) received bilateral
stereotaxic injections (100µl)

of either LB or noLB fractions into the putamen before euthanasia 24
months post-injection. This

time-frame was chosen based on our previous studies indicating that
after 14 months post-injection,

ongoing pathogenic effects can already be measured, and was extended to
potentially reach disease-

relevant lesions. Two years after administration, LB-injected monkeys
displayed significant striatal

dopaminergic terminal loss both in the putamen and in the caudate
nucleus, accompanied by a

significant decrease in tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactivity in
the substantia nigra pars

compacta (SNpc) (Fig. 2). Stereological counts showed that LB-injected
animals exhibited TH-

positive and Nissl-positive cell loss in the SNpc (16% and 23%,
respectively). No overt

parkinsonism was observed, however, since the extent of the lesion
remained below the threshold

for symptom appearance; i.e. 45% of cell loss (15), compared to an
age-matched control group.

At odds with mice either generated for the purpose of this study (Fig.
1G-H), previously published

(11), or produced in the context of other in-house studies (data not
shown), noLB-injected monkeys

showed degeneration of the nigrostriatal pathway including dopaminergic
cell loss (i.e. 16% of TH-

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

186

187

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

206

207

208

209

210

211

212

213

214

215

216

217

218

positive neurons and 28% of Nissl-positive neurons quantified by
stereology), similar to that

observed in LB-injected monkeys (Fig. 2). Facing such an unexpected
finding, we aimed to identify

specific characteristics of the pathological mechanisms involved in
a-syn toxicity induced by each

fraction independently, using a large-scale approach in combination with
machine learning for

pattern identification.

Machine-learning algorithm predicts nigrostriatal degeneration

We performed an exploratory approach and aimed to distinguish relevant
variables allowing

accurate prediction of neurodegeneration (i.e., to operate a feature
selection). Overall, we

investigated a large number of variables tapping on behavioral,
histological, biochemical,

transcriptional and biophysical approaches (Fig. 3A) applied to several
brain areas (n=40 – Fig.

3B), totalizing 180 variables measured for each individual (Fig. S4A for
variable abbreviation

nomenclature; Table S1 for exhaustive list of variables; Table S2
features all raw data). We first

extracted from this dataset, every variable that actually quantified
neurodegeneration (i.e. 

dopaminergic markers such as TH or dopamine transporter by
immunohistochemistry), ending up

with 163 variables per animal.

Then, to operate feature selection, we designed a distributed algorithm
using multiple layer

perceptron (MLP) (Bourdenx and Nioche, 2018), a classic machine-learning
algorithm based on

artificial neural network that is able to approximate virtually any
functions (Hornik et al., 1989).

This algorithm was given, as input, the data obtained for each animal
for the 163 aforementioned

variables and its output is a rank of these variables regarding their
ability to predict three indicators

of dopaminergic tract integrity; that were levels of tyrosine
hydroxylase staining in (i) the SNpc,

(ii) the putamen and (iii) the caudate nucleus.

The main difficulty was to overcome the large number of input variables
(163) compared to the

sample size (n=4-7 per group), which can induce a selection and
reporting bias (Kuncheva and

Rodriguez, 2018). In order to tackle this “p > n” problem, instead of
using a single network that

could be prone to overfitting, we put in competition several networks.

Each MLP was composed of a single hidden layer of 3 neurons (Fig. 3C).
It has as input a subset

of 3 variables (out of the 163) and as output the 3 indicators of
dopaminergic tract integrity. In total,

we used 708,561 sets of 3 inputs variables. Every instance of MLP was
trained with 80% of our

sample (always a combination of control and injected animals) and tested
on the remaining 20%.

The performance of each set of 3 input variables was evaluated according
to the difference between

the predicted values of TH staining and the actual ones.

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

219

220

221

222

223

224

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

We focused on the top 1% of the best networks and counted the occurrence
of each of the 163

variables in the subset of 3 variables used by these best networks (Fig.
3C). We ranked each variable

according to the number of occurrences (Fig. 3C) for LB- (Fig. 3D) and
noLB-injected animals

(Fig. 3E) independently.

In order to avoid possible overfitting, we used several methods in
combination. First, we performed

cross-validation by splitting the dataset into two parts: a training and
a testing set of data. 80% of

the data were randomly selected to train the networks (and independently
for each network), while

the 20% remaining were used to evaluate the networks. Then, in order to
evaluate the robustness of

the quality of prediction for a given set, we repeated this
cross-validation step 50 times for every

set of 3 input variables (each network was trained and tested using a
different partition of the dataset

-   total number of network: 35,428,050). Lastly, we generated random
    data and used them as input

for the MLP. As expected, performances were significantly lower compared
to our actual dataset

(Fig. S4B, C).

Overall, this unique approach allowed us to rank input variables
according to their explanatory

power and therefore to extract the strongest predictors of
neurodegeneration for each experimental

group. Interestingly, despite similar levels of nigrostriatal
degeneration between LB- and noLB-

injected animals (Fig. 2B), the algorithm allowed us to identify
differential variable sorting patterns

(Fig. 3D-E).

MLP-derived signatures can identify unique characteristics between
experiment group

Next, we compared the LB and noLB characteristics using the rank-rank
hypergeometric overlap

(RRHO) test (Fig. 4A). Interestingly, low similarity was observed for
the highly ranked variables

suggesting specific differences in the biological response to the
injection of LB or noLB (Fig. 4B).

Focusing on the 20 first variables that showed low similarity between
groups, we found that LB-

exposed monkeys were characterized by both quantitative and qualitative
changes in a-syn levels

(i.e. phosphorylation at Ser129 and aggregation) especially in cortical
areas corroborated by distinct

methodologies as well as by a dysfunctional equilibrium in
neurochemistry of basal ganglia output

structures classically associated with parkinsonism (16, 17) (Fig. 4C –
Fig. S5). Conversely, noLB-

exposed monkeys exhibited more diverse nigrostriatal-centric
characteristics with variables related

to a-syn aggregation, proteostasis and Zn homeostasis (Fig. 4D - Fig.
S6). Together, we identified

specific properties for both groups with limited overlap (35% - 7/20
variables) for an identical level

of degeneration.

Retrospective literature search validates MLP derived signatures

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

263

264

265

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

273

274

275

276

277

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

We next used a retrospective analysis to validates the relevance of the
MLP-derived signature in

PD. Although, some variables have never been investigated in the context
of PD, others have been

studied and reports exists in the literature. For instance, the amount
of phosphorylated Ser129 α-

synuclein in the entorhinal (h.psyn.ctx.er.ant) and parahippocampal
(h.psyn.ctx.phipp) cortex - 1st

and 2nd best predictors for the LB group – have been already associated
with PD pathology. Studies

of post-mortem brains from PD patients revealed the presence of LB in
these regions which was

correlated with disease progression(18) and predicted cognitive deficit
in PD patients (19).

Interestingly, the anterior entorhinal cortex has also been shown to be
affected by severe α-syn

pathology, related to olfactory dysfunction in prodromal phases of PD
pathology (20). In addition,

increased of levels of phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn in sensorimotor
(h.syn.ctx.sma.ant) and

cingulate cortices (h.syn.ctx.cg.ant), shared by both LB and noLB
signatures, have already been

reported by our group in an independent cohort of non-human primates
(11).

Both LB and noLB signatures, and especially noLB, showed that variables
related to a-syn

aggregation status were among the best predictors (LB: 1 in top10 best
predictors; noLB 3 in top10

best predictors). This was highly expected from the literature as α-syn
aggregation has been

associated with PD pathology (21).

Variables related to the proteostasis network (levels of the lysosomal
receptor LAMP2 –

wb.lamp2.sn - 6th or amount of ubiquinated proteins – wb.ub.sn – 9th)
were more specifically

associated with the noLB signature. This is of high interest as
proteostasis defect is more and more

considered as a key step in pathogenicity (22-24).

Levels of the microglia marker, IbaI, was ranked as the third best
predictor of neurodegeneration

in the LB signature. Microglial inflammatory response was shown to be
implicated in

neurodegeneration in many animal models, including α-syn overexpressing
and toxin-based animal

model of PD (25).

Lastly, postmortem analysis of Zn2+ concentration in the brains of PD
patients has shown elevated

levels in the striatum and SNpc (26). Conversely, a recent meta-analysis
showed a decrease of

circulating Zn2+ levels in PD patients (27). In experimental models of
PD, Zn2+ accumulation has

been associated with dopaminergic degeneration in rodent exposed to
mitochondrial toxins (28,

29).

Experimental confirmation of MLPs’ prediction

We aimed to confirm the relevance of the top first MLP selected
variables. Since the LB signature

was associated with changes in a-syn phosphorylation in cortical areas,
we analyzed side-by-side

the levels of a-syn and phosphorylated Ser129 a-syn in 18 brain regions
(Fig. 5A). Interestingly,

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

287

288

289

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

317

318

319

in agreement with the LB signature obtained from the MLP, LB-injected
monkeys displayed a

stronger accumulation of phosphorylated Ser129 a-syn compared to
noLB-injected animals (Fig.

5A-B). Also, the 2 most enriched variables of the LB signature
(i.e. phosphorylated a-syn levels in

parahippocampal and entorhinal cortices (Fig. 4C)) showed significant
negative correlations with

degrees of degeneration (Fig. 5C-D), thus confirming their ability to
predict neurodegeneration.

Then, we decided to confirm the relevance of one of the strongest
predictors, the levels of Zn2+ in

the SNpc in independent experiments. First, we observed a significant
increase of Zn2+ in noLB-

injected mice compared to sham-injected or LB-injected mice (Fig. S7A).
Second, we analyzed the

levels of Zn2+ in LB-injected macaque monkeys from a previous study of
our laboratory (11).

Interestingly, despite the fact that these experiments were done in a
different non-human primate

sub specie, injection of LB in the putamen (similar to the present
study) or above the SNpc (different

from the present study) induced elevation of Zn2+ levels in the SNpc, as
measured by SR-XRF (Fig.

S7B). Of note, the dimension of the effect was similar across studies
(Fig. S7E). Then, to

understand whether that modulation Zn2+ levels was specific to our
experimental paradigm, we

measured Zn2+ levels in the context of adeno-associated virus-mediated
overexpression of mutant

human a-syn in both rats and marmoset monkeys (30) using the same
methodology (Fig. S7C, D).

Here, overexpression of a-syn did not triggered accumulation of Zn2+ in
the SNpc (despite inducing

dopaminergic neurodegeneration – (30) suggesting that this phenomenon is
specific to seeding

experiment paradigms.

Lastly, we analyzed a publicly available cortical proteomic database of
healthy individual and PD

patients. Of interest, we observed that several Zn2+ transporters were
elevated in the brains of PD

patients thus suggesting a zinc dyshomeostasis in patients (Fig. S7F).
Indeed, plasma membrane

transporters such as the zinc transporter 1 (ZnT1), the Zrt-/Irt-like
protein 6 (ZIP6) and ZIP10

showed increased levels (Fig. S7G-I) while the synaptic vesicle membrane
transporter ZnT3

remained constant (Fig. S7J).

Association metric shows independence of strong predictors

As we used combinations of 3 variables and because of the structure of
MLPs, one could expect

that some combinations would complement each other

to allow finer prediction of

neurodegeneration levels. To address this question, we used a classic
measurement of association

in the field of data-mining: lift (31) and plotted the results as
network plots showing association

(edge size) and enrichment in the best learners (node size). Lift
calculation was corrected for error

prediction to avoid detrimental association between variables. The first
observation was that the

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

most enriched variables (top 3 to 5) appeared to be self-sufficient to
predict the neurodegeneration

levels with minimal error (Fig. 6). Some variables, with modest
enrichment, showed strong positive

associations that were specific to each experimental group. Associated
variables in LB-injected

monkeys were: (i) α-syn-related parameters along the
SNpc-striatum-cortex axis, an impairment of

locomotion and the ethologically-defined orientation of the animals
towards their environment (Fig.

6 top left inset); (ii) oligomeric α-syn species measured in the
midbrain and striatum equally

associated, but to lesser extent, with a-syn levels in cortex and plasma
(Fig. 6 top right inset).

In noLB-injected animals, the analysis shed light upon the relative
abundance of two members of

the macroautophagy pathway (Fig. 6B top left) as well as the balance
between monomeric and high-

molecular weight species of a-syn in the putamen (Fig. 6B bottom right).
Such disruption of the

nigrostriatal pathway has repercussions upon the basal ganglia
physiology as GABA levels in their

output structure, the internal globus pallidus, was associated with a
decreased social behavior (Fig.

6B bottom left inset).

320

321

322

323

324

325

326

327

328

329

330

331

332

333

334

DISCUSSION

335

336

337

338

339

340

341

342

343

344

345

346

347

348

349

350

351

In the present study, we report that, in non-human primates, injection
of distinct a-syn assemblies

derived from PD patients lead to dopaminergic degeneration through
discrete mechanisms.

Applying a machine-learning method, we gained insight into unique
signatures of degeneration

induced by injection of two distinct a-syn pathogenic assemblies
(i.e. those contained in the LB

and noLB fractions derived from idiopathic PD patients’ brains). To do
so, we built a large dataset

with 180 variables obtained from behavioral, histological, biochemical,
transcriptional and

biophysical approaches applied to several brain areas for each
individual. By using a distributed

MLP algorithm that we developed for the purpose of this study, we
identified characteristics that

give insight into the strongest predictors of neurodegeneration for each
experimental group. We

have, therefore, described for the first time that distinct a-syn
assemblies leading to similar

degeneration in monkeys are associated with different mechanisms, hence
experimentally

confirming the true multifactorial nature of synucleinopathies.

Our results illustrate that both small oligomeric as well as larger
a-syn assemblies induce

dopaminergic degeneration in non-human primates. This finding was
unexpected, since previous

mouse studies from our laboratory showed that noLB injection did not
have any observable

consequence regarding dopaminergic degeneration, a-syn accumulation or
phosphorylation (11).

In agreement, other groups also showed the absence of toxicity of
soluble recombinant a-syn (12).

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

352

353

354

355

356

357

358

359

360

361

362

363

364

365

366

367

368

369

370

371

372

373

374

375

376

377

378

379

380

381

382

383

384

One possible explanation is that primate dopaminergic neurons could be
highly susceptible to a-

syn toxicity. This could be in part due to their unique cellular
architecture (32), a feature already

known to contribute to the selective vulnerability of these neurons in
PD (33). In fact, the large and

complex axonal arbor of dopamine neurons make them particularly
vulnerable to factors that

contribute to cell death and , in primates, this axonal arbor is
ten-fold the size of that in rodents

(32). In addition, primate dopamine neurons display unique molecular
characteristics (e.g. the

presence of neuromelanin, the intracellular levels of which have been
shown to be important in the

threshold for the initiation of PD) (34). These unique features of
primate dopaminergic neurons

might be important in explaining the toxic mechanisms of the relatively
low content of a-syn

aggregates in the noLB fractions. Additional studies are now needed to
fully address the question

of host-seed interactions, but our results highlight the relevance and
the need of the non-human

primate model for the study of synucleinopathies.

We also confirmed that the toxicity mechanisms associated with
patient-derived a-syn aggregates

are shared features among patients and, therefore, common to the
disease. Indeed, LB and noLB

fractions used in this study were isolated from a pool of 5 patients who
were different from the pool

of 3 patients used in our previous study in mice (11). In the mice
experiment (Fig. S3B) performed

in this study, we observed the same level of dopaminergic degeneration
(~40% at 4 months after

injection).

The surprising observation, in non-human primates, that the noLB
fraction is toxic to the same

extent as the LB fraction suggests the existence of previously
unrecognized forms of a-syn toxicity.

Several studies have suggested that pre-fibrillar oligomeric species are
the toxic a-syn species (8,

9). Our biochemical studies showed that noLB and LB fractions had
different amyloid properties

(Fig. 1), contents (Fig. S1, S2A) and structures (Fig. S2B-E). Indeed,
LB fractions contained a

majority of large aggregated a-syn fibrils as well as some smaller
aggregates while noLB fractions

contained a smaller proportion (10 folds) of smaller aggregates and
soluble a-syn. More

importantly, the smaller aggregates were different in nature between LB
and noLB fractions, as

shown by micro-infrared spectroscopy (Fig. S2B-E). One could hypothesize
that the observed effect

is due to a species common between LB and noLB. However, because of the
extent of degeneration,

which was similar between the two experimental groups, and the a-syn
content dissimilarity, both

in amount and nature, this appears very unlikely. We believe that our
results support the notion of

the existence of a range of a-syn pathogenic structures with distinct
toxic properties within the PD

brain. Further work is necessary to provide a complete structural
characterization of those species.

As yet, very few studies report the high-resolution structures of a-syn
aggregates, which are on the

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

385

386

387

388

389

390

391

392

393

394

395

396

397

398

399

400

401

402

403

404

405

406

407

408

409

410

411

412

413

414

415

416

one hand, only derived from studies using recombinant a-syn and, on the
other hand, limited to

near atomic resolution (35-37). Encouragingly, much effort is currently
being devoted to this field

of research and two recent studies reported the atomic structure of
a-syn fibrils determined by cryo-

electron microscopy (38, 39), while still being limited to
recombinant-generated a-syn, and not

isolated from human brain tissue.

In order to perform a characterization of the effects of the two
fractions, we developed a machine

learning method to identify their biological characteristics. It is now
well accepted that machine

learning algorithms can be trained to detect patterns as well as, or
even better than, humans (40-

42). Instead of the classification algorithms (the algorithm learns to
identify in which category a

sample belongs) that were mostly used in recent applications of machine
learning in biology (43),

we chose in this study to predict continuous and biologically-relevant
variables using MLPs. Our

choice was motivated by the limited sample size that is often a
constraint of experimental biology.

Although it might have been possible to use other feature selection
methods, the use of MLPs with

a distributed architecture allowed us to avoid overfitting issues and to
develop a method particularly

well-suited for low sample size datasets (44). As both LB and
noLB-injected monkeys displayed

similar levels of degeneration, they were indistinguishable using that
endpoint. Instead of using a

clustering analysis or a classification method, hence making the a
priori assumption that these

groups where different, we preferred to submit the two experimental
groups to the MLP

independently.

The combination of this constrained, distributed architecture and the
holistic approach allowed us

to rank input variables according to the number of times they appeared
in the group of best

predictors (defined as top 1% of best networks). A major issue in the
use of machine learning in

experimental biology in the ‘black-box’ is the fact that it is usually
impossible to ‘understand’ how

an algorithm predicted an output (45). By using a reverse engineering
method, we aimed to tackle

that issue. Because we explored all possible combinations of our
variables, we could rank the input

variables assuming that the more they appeared in the top 1%, the more
they contained information

allowing precise prediction of the neurodegeneration levels.
Interestingly, our two experimental

groups showed that some of the best predictors were similar (about 30%)
but the majority were

different. One could hypothesize that the similar variables between the
two signatures probably

embedded information that are consequences of neurodegeneration while
the different ones

probably contain information regarding the process of disease initiation
and/or progression. Further

experimental studies are now needed to confirm the relevance of these
variables.

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

417

418

419

420

421

422

423

424

425

426

427

428

429

430

431

432

433

434

435

436

437

438

439

440

441

442

443

444

445

446

447

448

449

Also, as these two kinds of a-syn assemblies were associated with
different signatures identified

by our MLP approach, we propose that our results illustrate the
multifactorial nature of the disease

as different mechanisms (i.e. signatures) initiated by different
triggers (i.e. a-syn assemblies) led

to similar consequences (i.e. degeneration levels).

Using this methodology, we confirmed the interest of highly-expected
variables but more

importantly also unexpected variables that appear to be excellent
predictors of a-syn-associated

dopaminergic degeneration. The first hit for LB-injected animals was
phosphorylated a-syn in the

entorhinal cortex (as we have previously shown) followed by
phosphorylated a-syn in the para-

hippocampal cortex (unexpected), striatal microglial activation and GABA
dysregulation in the

internal part of the globus pallidus (expected) (Fig. S5). Conversely,
Zn homeostasis was a strong

predictive variable (unexpected) followed by a-syn aggregation-related
terms (expected) in noLB-

injected animals (Fig. S6).

In order to confirm the prediction made by the MLP approach, we first
performed a retrospective

literature analysis. This analysis showed that a significant part of the
best predictors has been shown

in the literature to be correlated with disease progression. Then, we
attempted to confirm the interest

of one of the top hits, the accumulation of Zn2+ in the SNpc, in
independent experimental cohorts.

Interestingly, we here describe that both in mice injected with noLB or
in macaque monkeys (a

different non-human primate sub species that the baboons used in that
study) injected either in the

striatum or in the SNpc, Zn levels were increased in the SNpc. However,
in mice, Zn

dyshomeostasis was not associated with neurodegeneration in the noLB
group (at odds with what

was observed in monkeys) suggesting a species difference in the
relationship between zinc levels

and dopaminergic tract integrity. Surprisingly, that result was not
observed in rats and marmoset

monkeys overexpressing human mutant a-syn. This observation might
suggest that Zn

dyshomeostasis is a feature of disease not triggered in the context of
human mutant a-syn

overexpression that is associated with fast progressing pathology
(Bourdenx et al. 2015). Then, in

order to expand our results to human pathology, we analyzed a publicly
available proteomic dataset

of human samples. According to that analysis, PD patients displayed
increased levels of plasma

membrane Zn transporters, hence suggesting a Zn dyshomeostasis in
patients. In the context of PD,

Zn dyshomeostasis has been associated with autophagy/lysosomal
dysfunction in the context of

PARK9 mutations (Ramirez et al. 2006, Dehay et al. 2012). Further
studies are now needed to fully

unravel this connection.

Altogether, our findings show that primate dopaminergic neurons are
sensitive to both small, mostly

soluble, a-syn extracts as well as larger, aggregated, a-syn extracts
derived from PD patients. These

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

findings involve two immediate outcomes. First, since this toxicity has
not been reported so far it

suggest species differences that would need to be thoroughly
investigated (46, 47) and calls for a

systematic appraisal of proteinopathies in primates in particular for
validating therapeutic strategies

before clinical testing (48). Second, the present study highlights the
complex structure-toxicity

relationship of a-syn assemblies and corroborates the multifactorial
origin of synucleinopathies as

distinct assemblies can induce similar degeneration (that would probably
lead to similar clinical

manifestation in patients) through different mechanisms, nigrostriatal
or extranigral brain

pathways, calling for molecular diagnosis to identify patient
sub-populations before launching

large-scale, heterogeneous in nature, clinical trials. Finally, we
developed a machine-learning

approach allowing and quantitative assessment of the explanatory power
of a given set of variables

compatible with the constrained sample size of experimental biology.

450

451

452

453

454

455

456

457

458

459

460

461

462

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

463

MATERIALS AND METHODS

464

465

466

467

468

469

470

471

472

473

474

475

476

477

478

479

480

481

482

483

484

485

486

487

488

489

490

491

492

493

494

495

Access to data and machine-learning code for replicability and further
use by the community

The entire raw data set is made available to the readers (Table S2).
Authors chose not to provide

representative examples of each procedure for the sake of space and
because the entire data set is

fully disclosed. Further information and requests for examples should be
directed to and will be

fulfilled by

the Corresponding Contacts. Hyperlink

to

the machine-learning code

(10.5281/zenodo.1240558) is provided
(https://zenodo.org/record/1240558#.XC8pqy17Su4).

Ethics statement

Experiments were performed in accordance with the European Union
directive of September 22,

2010 (2010/63/EU) on the protection of animals used for scientific
purposes. The Animal

Experimentation Ethical Committee (CEEA) of the Vall d’Hebron Institute
of Research (VHIR)

approved experiments under the license number CEEA 81/13 (rats). The
Institutional Animal Care

and Ethical Committee of Bordeaux University (CE50, France) approved
experiments under the

license number 5012099-A (mice). The Institutional Animal Care and
Ethical Committee of Murcia

University (Spain) approved experiments under the license number REGA
ES300305440012

(monkeys).

Animals and Stereotactic Injections

Mice. Wild-type C57BL/6 mice (4 months old) received 2µl of either LB
fractions or noLB

fractions by stereotactic delivery to the region immediately above the
right substantia nigra

(coordinates from Bregma: AP=-2.9, L= -1,3, DV=-4.5) at a flow rate of
0.4µl/min and the pipette

was left in place for 5 min after injection to avoid leakage. Mice were
killed four months after

injection. Ten to fifteen mice were used in each group.

Monkeys. Animals, whuch were from the research animal facility of the
University of Murcia

(Murcia, Spain) and housed in 2 multi-male multi-female exterior pens,
were studied in a breeding

farm over 2 years (Murcia, Spain). Animals were fed fruits, vegetables
and monkey pellets twice a

day before 9 am and after 5pm. Water was available ad libitum. 17
healthy adult olive baboons

(Papio papio) were used in this study. Group sizes were chosen assuming
a one-tailed alpha of 0.05,

with sample size of at least three per group, which provided >80% power
to detect a difference

between the treatment groups and the control group, using a Fisher’s
exact test. Animals were

randomized into treatment or control groups. Six baboons were used for
LB injections, four were

used for noLB injections and seven were untreated control animals.
Intrastriatal injections of either

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

496

497

498

499

500

501

502

503

504

505

506

507

508

509

510

511

512

513

514

515

516

517

518

519

520

521

522

523

524

525

526

527

528

529

LB fractions or noLB fractions were performed at 2 rostrocaudal levels
of the motor striatum

(anterior commissure [AC], -1mm and -5mm) under stereotactic guidance as
previously described

(49-52) . The total injected volume per hemisphere was 100µl (2
injection sites with 50µl each at

3µl/min at each location site). After each injection, the syringe was
left in place for 10 min to

prevent leakage along the needle track. A number of parameters were
monitored during the course

of the two-year study, including survival and clinical observations. At
the end of the experiment

(24 months post-injection), all monkeys were euthanised with
pentobarbital overdose (150mg/kg

i.v.), followed by perfusion with room-temperature 0.9% saline solution
(containing 1% heparin)

in accordance with accepted European Veterinary Medical Association
guidelines. Brains were

removed quickly after death. Each brain was then dissected along the
midline and each hemisphere

was divided into three parts. The left hemisphere was immediately frozen
by immersion in

isopentane at -50°C for at least 5 min and stored at -80°C. The right
hemisphere was fixed for one

week in 10 vol/tissue of 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C, cryoprotected in
two successive gradients of

20 then 30% sucrose in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) before being
frozen by immersion in

isopentane (-50°C) for at least 5 min and stored at -80°C until
sectioning. CSF and blood samples

(plasma, serum, whole blood) in the 17 animals were carefully collected
before euthanasia. No

samples were excluded from analysis in these studies.

Purification of Lewy bodies from human PD Brains

The samples were obtained from brains collected in a Brain Donation
Program of the Brain Bank

“GIE NeuroCEB” run by a consortium of Patients Associations: ARSEP
(association for research

on multiple sclerosis), CSC (cerebellar ataxias), France Alzheimer and
France Parkinson. The

consents were signed by the patients themselves or their next of kin in
their name, in accordance

with the French Bioethical Laws. The Brain Bank GIE NeuroCEB
(Bioresource Research Impact

Factor number BB-0033-00011) has been declared at the Ministry of Higher
Education and

Research and has received approval to distribute samples (agreement
AC-2013-1887). Human

SNpc was dissected from fresh frozen postmortem midbrain samples from 5
patients with sporadic

PD exhibiting conspicuous nigral LB pathology on neuropathological
examination (mean age at

death: 75 ± 2.75 years; frozen post-mortem interval: 31.8 ± 7.45h; GIE
Neuro-CEB BB-0033-

00011). Tissue was homogenized in 9 vol (w/v) ice-cold MSE buffer (10 mM
MOPS/KOH, pH 7.4,

1Msucrose, 1mM EGTA, and 1mMEDTA) with protease inhibitor cocktail
(Complete Mini;

Boehringer Mannheim) with 12 strokes of a motor-driven glass/teflon
dounce homogenizer. For

LB purification, a sucrose step gradient was prepared by overlaying 2.2
M with 1.4 M and finally

with 1.2 M sucrose in volume ratios of 3.5:8:8 (v/v). The homogenate was
layered on the gradient

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

530

531

532

533

534

535

536

537

538

539

540

541

542

543

544

545

546

547

548

549

550

551

552

553

554

555

556

557

558

559

560

561

562

563

and centrifuged at 160,000 x g for 3 h using a SW32.1 rotor (Beckman).
Twenty-six fractions of

1500 μl were collected from each gradient from top (fraction 1) to
bottom (fraction 26) and analyzed

for the presence of α-synuclein aggregates by filter retardation assay,
as previously described (11).

Further characterization of LB fractions was performed by
immunofluorescence, α-synuclein

ELISA quantification and electron microscopy as previously described
(11). For stereotactic

injections, LB-containing fractions from PD patients were mixed together
in the same proportion

(PD#1, fractions 19 and 20; PD#2, fractions 19 and 20; PD#3, fraction
22; PD#4, fractions 17,18

and 19; PD#5, fractions 20, 21 and 23). NoLB-containing fractions
(i.e. fraction 3, at the beginning

of the 1,2M interface) derived from the same PD patients (which contain
soluble or finely granular

α-synuclein) but lacks large LB-linked α-synuclein aggregates were
obtained from the same sucrose

gradient purification. Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
kit against human α-

synuclein (Invitrogen, #KHB0061 – following manufacturer’s
recommendations), a-syn

concentration was measured and both LB and noLB fractions were adjusted
to ~24 pg α-synuclein

per microliter. In all cases, samples were bath-sonicated for 5 min
prior to in vitro and in vivo

injections.

Characterization of noLB and LB fractions

Electron microscopy. Briefly, carbon-coated nickel grids were covered
for 1 min with

corresponding fractions of interest, then washed 3 times with distilled
water. They were then

washed again in distilled water and stained for 5 min with 2% uranyl
acetate, before being air-dried.

Digital images were obtained with a computer linked directly to a CCD
camera (Gatan) on a Hitachi

H-7650 electron microscope. In all cases, samples were bath-sonicated
for 5 min prior to the in

vitro applications.

Immunofluorescence analysis of noLB and LB fractions. Indicated
fractions from the sucrose

gradient were spread over slides coated with poly-D lysine and fixed
with 4% paraformaldehyde

(PFA) in PBS for 30 min. Fixed slides were stained with 0.05% thioflavin
S for 8 min and then

washed three times with 80% EtOH for 5 min, followed by two washes in
PBS for 5 min. Finally,

all samples were washed 3 times with PBS and blocked with 2% casein and
2% normal goat serum

for 30 min. For immunofluorescence analyses, samples were incubated with
human α-synuclein

specific antibody (clone syn211, Thermo Scientific, 1:1000) for 30 min,
washed three times with

PBS, incubated with a goat anti-mouse TRITC (Jackson, 1:500), before
being cover-slipped for

microscopic visualization using fluorescence mounting medium.

Dot-blotting analysis. To evaluate PK-resistant α-synuclein contained in
noLB and LB fractions

derived from PD brains, each fraction was subjected to digestion with 1
µg/ml proteinase K for 0,

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

564

565

566

567

568

569

570

571

572

573

574

575

576

577

578

579

580

581

582

583

584

585

586

587

588

589

590

591

592

593

594

595

596

597

15, 30, 45, and 60 min. The reaction was stopped by boiling for 5 min
before dot-blotting with

syn211 antibody. To analyze their stability, noLB and LB fractions were
treated with increasing

concentrations of urea (7 and 8M) or sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (0.5,
1 and 2%) for 6 h at room

temperature. α-Synuclein was visualized as described above.

Filter retardation assay of noLB and LB fractions were probed with
antibodies against,

phosphorylated α-synuclein (Abcam EP1536Y, 1:1000), ubiquitin
(Sigma-Aldrich U5379, 1:1000),

p62 (Progen GR62-C, 1:1000), hyperphosphorylated tau (AT8, MN1020,
ThermoFischer) or Ab

(DAKO clone 6F/3D, 1:1000).

Human α -Synuclein aggregation TR-FRET immunoassay. Time-resolved
Förster’s resonance

energy transfer (TR-FRET)-based immunoassays were validated for total
and oligomeric α-

synuclein (53). Ten microliters of noLB and LB samples were analyzed for
total α-synuclein

quantification with the TR-FRET immunoassays kit against human
α-synuclein aggregation kit

(Cisbio, #6FASYPEG) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Velocity sedimentation and density floatation a-synuclein profiles in
noLB and LB fractions. Frozen

noLB and LB fractions aliquots (100 µL) were thawed and solubilized in
solubilization buffer (SB)

to reach 10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, Complete
EDTA-free

protease inhibitors (Roche), PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Roche), 1
U/µL Benzonase

(Novagen), 2 mM MgCl2 and 2% (w/v) N-lauroyl-sarcosine (sarkosyl, Sigma)
final concentrations,

by incubating at 37ºC under constant shaking at 600 rpm (Thermomixer,
Eppendorf) for 45 minutes.

For velocity sedimentations, a volume of 400 µL of solubilized noLB / LB
fraction was loaded on

top of a 11 mL continuous 5-20% iodixanol gradient (Optiprep, Sigma) in
SB buffer containing

0.5% w/v final sarkosyl concentration, linearized directly in
ultracentrifuge 11 mL tubes (Seton)

with a Gradient Master (Biocomp). For density floatation gradients, a
volume of 400 µL of

solubilized noLB / LB fraction was mixed to reach 40% iodixanol in SB
buffer with 0.5% w/v final

sarkosyl concentration and loaded within an 11 mL 10-60% discontinuous
iodixanol gradient in SB

buffer with 0.5% w/v final sarkosyl concentration. The gradients were
centrifuged at 180,000 g for

3 hours (velocity) or for 17 hours (density) in a swinging-bucket SW-40
Ti rotor using an Optima

L-90K ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter). Gradients were then segregated
into 16 equal fractions

from the top using a piston fractionator (Biocomp) and a fraction
collector (Gilson). Fractions were

aliquoted for further analysis of their content by dot-blot. Gradient
linearity was verified by

refractometry.

For dot blotting, aliquots of the collected native fractions were
spotted onto Hybond PVDF 0.2 µm

membranes (GE Healthcare) using a dot blot vacuum device (Whatman). For
total (MJFR1) and

phosphorylated pS129 (EP1536Y) a-synuclein immunolabelling, a step of
fixation in PBS - 0.1%

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

598

599

600

601

602

603

604

605

606

607

608

609

610

611

612

613

614

615

616

617

618

619

620

621

622

623

624

625

626

627

628

629

630

631

glutaraldehyde was performed at this point, followed by 3 washes in PBS.
Membranes were then

blocked with 5 % (w/v) skimmed milk powder in PBS - 0.1% (v/v) Tween and
probed with anti-

human a-synuclein (MJFR1, rabbit 1:10000, Abcam), anti-phospho pS129
a-synuclein (EP1536Y,

rabbit 1:5000, Abcam) or anti a-synuclein aggregate specific FILA-1
(MJFR14-6-4-2, rabbit

1:10000, Abcam) primary antibodies in PBS-T - 4% (w/v) BSA, and
secondary goat anti rabbit IgG

HRP-conjugated antibodies (1:10000, Jackson Laboratories) in PBS-T 1%
(w/v) milk.

Immunoreactivity was visualized by chemiluminescence (GE Healthcare).
The amount of the

respective protein in each fraction was determined by the Image Studio
Lite software, after

acquisition of chemiluminescent signals with a Chemidoc imager (Biorad).
Profiles obtained by

immunoblot were normalized and plotted with SEM using the Prism
software.

FTIR microspectroscopy. 1-2 µL of each suspension was deposited on a
CaF2 window and dried at

room pressure and temperature. The protein aggregates were then measured
in transmission at

50x50 µm² spatial resolution with an infrared microscope (54). Depending
on its size it was

possible to collect one to twenty spectra inside each aggregate. The
infrared microscope was a

Thermo Scientific Continuum equipped with a MCT detector and a 32x 0.65
NA Reflachromat

objective and matching condenser, coupled to a Thermo Scientific Nicolet
8700 spectrometer with

a globar source and KBr beamsplitter. The microscope was operated in
dual path single aperture

mode. Spectra were recorded between 650-4000 cm-1 at 2 cm-1 resolution,
with Happ-Genzel

apodization and Mertz phase correction. Spectra were processed in Omnic
9.2 for automatic

atmospheric correction to remove water vapor contribution.

Rat Ventral Midbrain Primary Cultures

Postnatally derived ventral midbrain cultures were prepared essentially
as previously described

(55). Briefly, cultures were prepared in two steps. In the first step,
rat astrocyte monolayers were

generated as follows. The entire cerebral cortex from a single rat pup
(postnatal days 1–2) was

removed, diced, and then mechanically dissociated by gentle trituration.
The isolated cells were

plated at 80,000 cells per well under which a laminin-coated coverslip
was affixed. The cells were

housed at 37°C in an incubator in 5% CO2 and were fed on glial media
(89% MEM, 9.9% calf

serum, 0.33% glucose, 0.5 mM glutamine, and 5 μg/mL insulin). Once
confluence had been attained

(about 1 week in vitro), fluorodeoxyuridine (6.7 mg/mL) and uridine
(16.5 mg/mL) were added to

prevent additional proliferation. In the second stage, which occurred 1
week later, rat pups aged

between 1 and 2 days were anesthetized and 1-mm3 blocks containing
ventral midbrain neurons

were dissected from 1-mm-thick sagittal sections taken along the midline
of the brain. Tissues were

collected immediately into cold phosphate buffer and were treated
enzymatically using papain (20

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

632

633

634

635

636

637

638

639

640

641

642

643

644

645

646

647

648

649

650

651

652

653

654

655

656

657

658

659

660

661

662

663

664

665

U/mL) with kynurenate (500 μM) at 37°C under continuous oxygenation with
gentle agitation for

2 h. A dissociated cell suspension was achieved by gentle trituration
and was then plated onto the

preestablished glia wells at a density of 0.5–1.7 million neurons per
well. Cultures were maintained

in specially designed neuronal media (47% MEM, 40% DMEM, 10% Hams F-12
nutrient medium,

1% calf serum, 0.25% albumin, 2 mg/mL glucose, 0.4 mM glutamine, 10
μg/mL catalase, 50 μM

kynurenic acid, 10 μM CNQX, 25 μg/mL insulin, 100 μg/mL transferrin, 5
μg/mL superoxide

dismutase, 2.4 μg/mL putrescine, 5.2 ng/mL Na2SeO3, 0.02 μg/mL
triiodothyronine, 62.5 ng/mL

progesterone, and 40 ng/mL cortisol) containing 27 μM fluorodeoxyuridine
and 68 μM uridine to

control glial outgrowth and in 10 ng/mL glial cell derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF). They were

incubated for a further 7–8 days until the start of experiments. All
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)

neurons were counted on each plate following the addition of noLB and LB
fractions after 1, 2, 5

and 7 days of treatment.

Non-Human Primate Behavioral Assessment

Following a 4-hour minimum habituation phase performed one day before
the beginning of the

observations, baboon behavior was observed outside the feeding and
cleaning times, in a random

order at two-time points (morning and afternoon), over 4 to 9 days (8
sessions per group). On the

1st observational time point (i.e. 1-month post-surgery), the
habituation phase was performed over

3 days allowing the observer to recognize the animals individually. We
used a scan-sampling

method, appropriate for time budgeting (56), in which behavioral
parameters were assessed every

5 minutes during 2-hour sessions, resulting in 192 scans per individual.
Extra observational sessions

were performed to avoid missing data. A unique trained observer (SC;
intra-observer reliability:

Spearman rank order correlation R=0.987) collected the data live on the
2-time points of the study:

at 1- and 24-months post-surgery. The observer was standing 1 m away
from the outdoor cages.

We focused on behavioral profiles rather than single items and used two
repertoires: one reports

the interaction with the environment and one describes the position
within the environment,

according to published protocols (57-59). We investigated the
percentages of occurrence of each

item with regard to the total number of scans in order to obtain mean
behavioral and postural time

budgets, body orientation and location profiles.

Histopathological analysis

Extent of lesion. To assess the integrity of the nigrostriatal pathway,
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)

immunohistochemistry was performed on SNpc and striatal sections.
Briefly, 50µm free-floating

sections from one representative level of the striatum (anterior, medial
and posterior) and serial

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

666

667

668

669

670

671

672

673

674

675

676

677

678

679

680

681

682

683

684

685

686

687

688

689

690

691

692

693

694

695

696

697

698

699

sections (1/12) corresponding to the whole SNpc were incubated with a
mouse monoclonal

antibody raised against human TH (Millipore, MAB318, 1:5000) for one
night at RT and revealed

by an anti-mouse peroxidase EnVisionTM system (DAKO, K400311) followed
by DAB

visualization. Free-floating SNpc sections were mounted on gelatinized
slides, counterstained with

0.1% cresyl violet solution, dehydrated and coverslipped, while striatal
sections were mounted on

gelatinized slides and coverslipped. The extent of the lesion in the
striatum was quantified by optical

density (OD). Sections were scanned in an Epson expression 10000XL high
resolution scanner and

images were used in ImageJ open source software to compare the grey
level in each region of

interest: i.e. caudate nucleus and putamen. TH-positive SNpc cells were
counted by stereology blind

with regard to the experimental condition using a Leica DM6000B
motorized microscope coupled

with the Mercator software (ExploraNova, France). The substantia nigra
was delineated for each

slide and probes for stereological counting were applied to the map
obtained (size of probes was

100x80μm spaced by 600x400μm). Each TH-positive cell with its nucleus
included in the probe

was counted. The optical fractionator method was finally used to
estimate the total number of TH-

positive cells in the SNpc of each monkey hemisphere. In addition, we
measured Nissl cell count,

the volume of SN, and the surface of TH-occupied in SN to fully
characterize the pattern of

dopaminergic cell loss in the SN.

α-synuclein pathology. Synucleinopathy was assessed with a mouse
monoclonal antibody raised

against human α-synuclein (syn211) and phosphorylated α-synuclein
(clone11A5, Elan, 1:5000)

immunostaining as we previously reported (11, 30). Briefly, selected
sections at two rostro-caudal

levels were incubated in a same well to allow direct comparison of
immunostaining intensity.

Sections were incubated overnight at room temperature with the
aforementioned antibodies. The

following day, revelation was performed with anti-specie peroxidase
EnVision system (DAKO)

followed by 3,3′ -diaminobenzidine (DAB) incubation. Sections were then
mounted on gelatinized

slides, dehydrated, counterstained if necessary and coverslipped until
further analysis. Grey level

quantification or immunostaining-positive surface quantification in
forty brain regions (Fig. 2B)

were performed as previously described (30).

Inflammation. Inflammatory process in the striatum, in the entorhinal
cortex and in the white matter

of noLB and LB-injected monkeys was measured through GFAP/S-100 (DAKO,
Z0334/Abnova,

PAP11341) and Iba1 (Abcam, ab5076) immunohistochemistry. Striatal
sections of all animals were

incubated together over night with a mix of rabbit antibodies raised
against GFAP and S-100 for

the astroglial staining (respective dilutions 1:2000 and 1:1000) and
with a goat anti-Iba1 antibody

for the microglial staining (dilution 1:1000). These signals were
reveled with anti-specie peroxidase

EnVision system (DAKO) followed by DAB incubation. Sections were mounted
on slides, counter-

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

700

701

702

703

704

705

706

707

708

709

710

711

712

713

714

715

716

717

718

719

720

721

722

723

724

725

726

727

728

729

730

731

732

733

stained in 0.1% cresyl violet solution, dehydrated and cover-slipped.
Sections stained by GFAP-S-

100 were numerized at x20 magnification with a NanoZoomer (Hamamatsu,
France) and the

quantification of GFAP-positive astrocytic reaction was estimated by a
immunostaining-positive

surface quantification at regional levels with the Mercator software
(ExploraNova, France).

Sections stained by Iba1 were used for the microglial morphology
analysis through fractal

dimension quantification based on microscopic acquisitions, as
previously described(60). All

analyses were performed blinded to the researcher.

mRNA extraction and qRT-PCR

Substantia nigra samples were homogenized in Tri-reagent (Euromedex,
France) and RNA was

isolated using a standard chloroform/isopropanol protocol(61). RNA was
processed and analyzed

following an adaptation of published methods(62). cDNA was synthesized
from 2 μg of total RNA

using RevertAid Premium Reverse Transcriptase (Fermentas) and primed
with oligo-dT primers

(Fermentas) and random primers (Fermentas). QPCR was perfomed using a
LightCycler® 480

Real-Time PCR System (Roche, Meylan, France). QPCR reactions were done
in duplicate for each

sample, using transcript-specific primers, cDNA (4 ng) and LightCycler
480 SYBR Green I Master

(Roche) in a final volume of 10 μl. The PCR data were exported and
analyzed in an informatics

tool (Gene Expression Analysis Software Environment) developed at the
NeuroCentre Magendie.

For the determination of the reference gene, the Genorm method was
used(63). Relative expression

analysis was corrected for PCR efficiency and normalized against two
reference genes. The

proteasome subunit, beta type, 6 (Psmb6) and eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 4a2 (EIF4A2)

genes were used as reference genes. The relative level of expression was
calculated using the

comparative (2-∆∆CT) method(63).

Primers sequences: Psmb6 (NM_002798) forward: CAAGAAGGAGGGCAGGTGTACT;
Psmb6

(NM_002798) reverse: CCTCCAATGGCAAAGGACTG; EIF4a2 (NM_001967) forward:

TGACATGGACCAGAAGGAGAGA;

EIF4a2

(NM_001967)

reverse:

TGATCAGAACACGACTTGACCCT; SNCA (CR457058) forward: GGGCAAGAATGAA

GAAGGAGC; SNCA (CR457058) reverse: GCCTCATTGTCAGGATCCACA.

Biochemical analysis

Total protein extraction and quantification. Immunoblot analyses were
performed on substantia

nigra, putamen and caudate nucleus. Five tissue patches were extracted
on ice using 100µl of RIPA

buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5%
Na-deoxycholate, 0.1%

sodium dodecyl sulfate) with a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet
(Complete Mini, Roche

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

734

735

736

737

738

739

740

741

742

743

744

745

746

747

748

749

750

751

752

753

754

755

756

757

758

759

760

761

762

763

764

765

766

767

Diagnostics). The lysate was placed on ice for 20 min and then
centrifuged at 14,000rpm for 15

min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and the Bicinchoninic Acid
(BCA) Assay was used to

determine the total amount of protein in the lysates, and then stored at
-80°C.

Based on total protein concentrations calculated from the BCA assays,
aliquots of tissue lysates

corresponding to known amounts of total protein per lane were prepared
for each animal in Laemmli

buffer (Tris-HCl 25mM pH=6.8, Glycerol 7.5%, SDS 1%, DTT 250mM and
Bromophenol Blue

0.05%) for immunoblotting experiment.

Biochemical fractionation. This technique was performed as
described(64). Tissue patches (n=10)

were homogenized in 200µl of high-salt (HS) buffer (50 mmol/L of Tris,
750 mmol/L of NaCl, 5

mmol/L of EDTA, and a cocktail of protease inhibitors and phosphatase
inhibitors). Samples were

sedimented at 100,000 × g for 20 minutes, and supernatants were removed
for analysis. Pellets were

rehomogenized in successive buffers, after which each was sedimented,
and supernatant was

removed: HS containing 1% Triton X-100 (HS/Triton) (Variable names
terminated as ultra.s1),

RIPA (50 mmol/L of Tris, 150 mmol/L of NaCl, 5 mmol/L of EDTA, 1% NP40,
0.5% Na

deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS) (Variable names terminated as ultra.s12, and
SDS/urea (8 mol/L of

urea, 2% SDS, 10 mmol/L of Tris; pH 7.5) (Variable names terminated as
ultra.p2). Sodium dodecyl

sulfate sample buffer was added, and samples were heated to 100°C for 5
minutes prior to

immunoblot analysis.

Western blot analysis. Western blots were run in all conditions from
20µg of protein separated by

SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose. Incubation of the primary
antibodies was performed

overnight at 4°C with rabbit anti-LC3 (1:1000, Novus Biologicals),
rabbit anti- LAMP-2 (1:1000,

Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse anti-TH (1:1000, Millipore), goat p62
(1:1000, Progen), mouse

anti human-α-synuclein (1:1000, Thermo Scientific). For detection of
ubiquitinated proteins,

proteins were transferred on polyvinylidene fluoride membranes
(Millipore) and subjected to

Western blot analysis using a rabbit anti-Ubiquitin (1:1000, Sigma
U5379). Anti-actin (1:5000,

Sigma) was used to control equal loading. Appropriate secondary
antibodies coupled to peroxidase

were revealed using a Super Signal West Pico Chemiluminescent kit
(Immobilon Western,

Chemiluminescent HRP substrate, Millipore). Chemiluminescence images
were acquired using the

ChemiDoc+XRS system measurement (BioRad). Signals per lane were
quantified using ImageJ

and a ratio of signal on loading per animal was performed and used in
statistical analyses.

Dot-blot analysis of α-synuclein. This technique was performed as we
previously described(9, 11).

After heating at 100 °C for 5 min, 20 μg of protein extract was diluted
in buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl,

200 mM Glycine, 1% SDS) and filtered through either a nitrocellulose
membrane or an acetate

cellulose membrane (Bio-Rad, 0.2 μm pore size). Membranes were then
saturated in 5% dry-

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

768

769

770

771

772

773

774

775

776

777

778

779

780

781

782

783

784

785

786

787

788

789

790

791

792

793

794

795

796

797

798

799

800

801

skimmed milk in PBS and probed with antibodies against α-synuclein
(syn211, 1:1000), both α-

synuclein fibrils and α-synuclein oligomers (Syn-O1, 1:10000(65, 66))
(kindly provided by Prof. 

Omar El-Agnaf). Revelation was done as described in the previous
Materials and Methods section.

Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence (SR-XRF) microscopy elemental
mapping of brain

tissue cryosections

The synchrotron experiments were carried out at Diamond Light Source,
Harwell Science and

Innovation Campus (Didcot, UK) with a 3 GeV energy of the storage ring
and 300 mA currents

with top-up injection mode. All SR-XRF microscopy investigations
reported herein were carried

out on the microfocus spectroscopy beamline (I18)(67). The micro X-ray
fluorescence (μ-XRF)

elemental mapping were acquired at room temperature with an incident
X-ray energy set to 12 keV

using an Si(111) monochromator and resulting in a X-ray photon flux of
2.1011 ph/s . The substantia

nigra of each animal were collected from free-floating sections and
mounted onto an X-ray

transparent metal-free 4 μm thickness Ultralene ® foil (SPEXCert Prep,
Metuchen, NJ, U.S.A.)

secured to a customized Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) holder ensuring
contamination-free samples

and reduced X-ray scattering contribution. The samples were affixed to a
magnetic plate that

connects to the sample stage. The 4-element Si drift Vortex ME4 energy
dispersive detector

(Hitachi Hi-Technologies Science America) with Xspress-3 processing
electronics, was operated

in the 90° geometry, as such it minimizes the background signal. The
sample-detector distance was

fixed (75 mm). The sample was held at 45° to the incident X-ray beam and
rastered in front of the

beam whilst the X-ray fluorescence spectra were collected. An area of
500 μm x 500 μm within the

substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) was mapped for each sample with a
step-size that match the

beam size (5 μm) and a dwell time of 1 s per pixel due to low
concentration of the element. A thin

(100 μm) pellet of the NIST standards reference materials SRM1577c
(bovine liver material, NIST,

Gaithersburg, MD, USA) was measured to calibrate experimental parameters
as well as a thin-film

XRF reference material (AXO Dresden GmbH). This was followed by
elemental quantification

through the open-source software PyMCA(68) in which both the reference
material and the sample

are modelled in terms of main composition, density and thickness. The
fluorescence spectrum

obtained from each pixel was fitted, the elemental concentration (μg/g
dry weight or ppm) maps

were generated and an average elemental concentration of the SNpc
regions was obtained.

Measurement of α-synuclein in monkey biological fluids samples

Multi-Array 96-well plates (MesoScale Discovery, Gaithersburg, MD, USA)
were coated with 30µl

3µl/ml MJFR1 (abcam, Cambridge, UK) as capture antibody and incubated
overnight at 4°C

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

802

803

804

805

806

807

808

809

810

811

812

813

814

815

816

817

818

819

820

821

822

823

824

825

826

827

828

829

830

831

832

833

834

835

without shaking. The next day plates were washed 3 times with 150µl
PBS-T [PBS (AppliChem,

Darmstadt, Germany) supplemented with 0,05% Tween-20 (Roth, Karlsruhe,
Germany)] per well.

Unspecific binding of proteins was prevented by incubation with 150µl 1%
BSA (SeraCare Life

Sciences, Milford, MA, USA)/PBS-T/well for 1 hour and shaking at 700rpm.
Calibrators (kindly

provided by Prof. Omar El-Agnaf) were prepared from single use aliquots
of α-synuclein (1µg/ml

stored at -80°C until use) and ranged from 25000pg/ml to 6,1pg/ml in
serial fourfold dilutions. 1%

BSA/PBS-T served as blank. For the different specimen the following
dilutions were applied: 1 in

10000 for whole blood and 1 in 8 for serum, plasma and CSF. All
dilutions were prepared in 1%

BSA/PBS-T. After washing the plates 25µl calibrator solutions and
diluted samples were applied

to the wells and incubated as indicated above. Plates were washed again
and 25µl Sulfo-TAG

labeled Syn1 antibody (BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany) diluted to
1µg/ml in 1% PBS-T

were applied to the wells as detection antibody. Sulfo-TAG labeling was
done according to the

manufacturer´s instruction using MSD Sulfo-TAG NHS-Ester (MSD).
Incubation was for 1 hour

at 700rpm. Plates were washed, 150µl 2x Read Buffer (MSD) was applied
and the plates were read

on a MSD SectorImager 2400. Data analysis was performed using WorkBench
software (MSD).

Neurotransmitter analysis

Brain patches were dissected out on ice-cold plate, weighed and put into
1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes.

Samples were homogenized in methanol/water (50:50% v/v), then
centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 15

min at 4°C(69). The supernatant was aliquoted and stored at -80°C until
amino acid derivatization.

Glutamate and GABA content in the samples was measured by HPLC coupled
with fluorometric

detection (FP-2020 Plus fluorimeter, Jasco, Tokyo, Japan) after
precolumn derivatization with o-

phthaldialdehyde/mercaptoethanol (OPA) reagent(70). Thirty microliters
of OPA reagent were

automatically added to 28 µL sample by a refrigerated autosampler kept
at 4C° (Triathlon, Spark

Holland, Emmen, The Netherlands). Fifty microliters of the mixture were
injected onto a 5-C18

Hypersil ODS column (3 X 100 mm; Thermo-Fisher, USA) perfused at 0.48
mL/min (Jasco PU-

2089 Plus Quaternary Pump; Jasco, Tokyo, Japan) with a mobile phase
containing 0.1 M sodium

acetate, 10% methanol, 2.2% tetrahydrofuran (pH 6.5). Chromatograms were
acquired and analysed

using a ChromNav software (Jasco, Tokyo, Japan). Under these conditions,
the limits of detection

for glutamate and GABA were ~1 nM and ~0.5 nM, and their retention times
~3.5 min and ~18.0

min, respectively.

Multiple-Layer Perceptrons

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

836

837

838

839

840

841

842

843

844

845

846

847

848

849

850

851

852

853

854

855

856

857

858

859

860

861

862

863

864

865

866

867

868

Each Multiple-layer Perceptron (MLP) had the same architecture rule: 3
neurons as input, 3 neurons

in the hidden layer and 3 neurons as output. Activation function of
neurons was the hyperbolic

tangent. Each network was trained over 1,000 presentations of a subset
of the dataset. We used as

error measure the mean square of differences between the expected output
and the actual output.

Our implementation comprises two parameters: a learning rate set at 0.05
(regulating the learning

speed), and a momentum set at 0.05 (introducing purposefully a
conservatism bias). Prior to

learning, inputs were first scaled and centered (z scoring) in order to
avoid dimensionality issues

and then normalized between -0.5 and 0.5. For every combination of 3
variables used as inputs, 50

instances of MLP were trained with different subsets of the dataset. 80%
of available data has

been used for learning and the remaining 20% for testing the performance
of the network (elements

of each subset were randomly (and uniformly) drawn for each network).
The performance from a

given set of input variables was the mean of the error of the 50
instances of MLP that had data for

these variables as inputs. Code was written using Python and the Python
scientific stack(71-73)

(Jones, 2001; Walt, 2011; Hunter, 2007). The code is

fully available here

(DOI:

10.5281/zenodo.1240558). Computation has been done using the Avakas
cluster of the Mesocentre

de Calcul Intensif Aquitain (MCIA). Rank-rank hypergeometric overlap
(RRHO) test was

performed as previously described(74) using RRHO package (1.14.0) in
R(75) on variable list after

ranking between experimental groups. Plotting was made using matplotlib
in Python environment.

The association metric was based on lift calculation. Let a and b be the
two variables and nx the

number of combinations including variable x and n the total number of
combinations considered in

the analysis. Lift calculation was then:

The lift calculation was then corrected for performance to avoid
selection of detrimental association

by being divided by the mean prediction error of the duo.

Quantification and statistical analysis

Regarding the data analysis for FTIR microspectroscopy, spectra were
analyzed by Principal

Component Analysis (PCA). PCA is a multivariate statistical analysis
technique that captures

independent sources of variance in the data and represents them in
Principal Components

(eigenvectors) that carry the underlying spectral information and in a
Score plot that shows the

relation between spectra and can be used to cluster the data based on
the spectral information. PCA

were performed in The UnscramblerX 10.3 (Camo Software) using the SVD
algorithm with

leverage correction. Two series of preprocessing were applied prior to
PCA and compared. Spectra

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

were either baseline corrected in the amide I region between 1590 and
1700 cm-1 and vector

normalized, or their second derivatives were computed and vector
normalized.

Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 6.0 (GraphPad
Software, Inc., San Diego,

CA). For all experiments, comparisons among means were performed by
using One-way analysis

of variance (ANOVA) followed, if appropriate, by a pairwise comparison
between means by Tukey

post-hoc analysis. All values are expressed as the mean±standard error
of the mean. Size effect was

assessed with Cohen’s d analysis. In all analyses, statistical
significance was set at p <0.05.

869

870

871

872

873

874

875

876

877

878

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

879

REFERENCES

880 881 882 883 884 885 886 887 888 889 890 891 892 893 894 895 896 897
898 899 900 901 902 903 904 905 906 907 908 909 910 911 912 913 914 915
916 917 918 919 920 921 922 923 924 925 926 927

1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
7.  
8.  
9.  
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 

H. Braak et al., Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic
Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 24, 197-211 (2003). J. H.
Kordower, Y. Chu, R. A. Hauser, T. B. Freeman, C. W. Olanow, Lewy
body-like pathology in long-term embryonic nigral transplants in
Parkinson’s disease. Nat Med 14, 504-506 (2008). J. Y. Li et al., Lewy
bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with Parkinson’s disease suggest
host-to-graft disease propagation. Nat Med 14, 501-503 (2008). I. Mendez
et al., Dopamine neurons implanted into people with Parkinson’s disease
survive without pathology for 14 years. Nat Med 14, 507-509 (2008). B.
Dehay, M. Vila, E. Bezard, P. Brundin, J. H. Kordower, Alpha-synuclein
propagation: New insights from animal models. Mov Disord 31, 161-168
(2016). A. Recasens, A. Ulusoy, P. J. Kahle, D. A. Di Monte, B. Dehay,
In vivo models of alpha- synuclein transmission and propagation. Cell
Tissue Res, (2017). M. G. Spillantini et al., Alpha-synuclein in Lewy
bodies. Nature 388, 839-840 (1997). B. Winner et al., In vivo
demonstration that alpha-synuclein oligomers are toxic. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 108, 4194-4199 (2011). M. Bourdenx et al., Protein aggregation
and neurodegeneration in prototypical neurodegenerative diseases:
Examples of amyloidopathies, tauopathies and synucleinopathies. Prog
Neurobiol 155, 171-193 (2017). N. Bengoa-Vergniory, R. F. Roberts, R.
Wade-Martins, J. Alegre-Abarrategui, Alpha- synuclein oligomers: a new
hope. Acta Neuropathol 134, 819-838 (2017). A. Recasens et al., Lewy
body extracts from Parkinson disease brains trigger alpha- synuclein
pathology and neurodegeneration in mice and monkeys. Ann Neurol 75, 351-
362 (2014). K. C. Luk et al., Pathological alpha-synuclein transmission
initiates Parkinson-like neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice.
Science 338, 949-953 (2012). L. A. Volpicelli-Daley et al., Exogenous
alpha-synuclein fibrils induce Lewy body pathology leading to synaptic
dysfunction and neuron death. Neuron 72, 57-71 (2011).

14. W. Peelaerts et al., alpha-Synuclein strains cause distinct
    synucleinopathies after local and

15. 

16. 

17. 

systemic administration. Nature 522, 340-344 (2015). E. Bezard et al.,
Relationship between the appearance of symptoms and the level of
nigrostriatal degeneration in a progressive
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine- lesioned macaque model of
Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci 21, 6853-6861 (2001). R. L. Albin, A. B.
Young, J. B. Penney, The functional anatomy of basal ganglia disorders.
Trends Neurosci. 12, 366-375 (1989). G. Porras et al., L-dopa-induced
dyskinesia: beyond an excessive dopamine tone in the striatum. Sci Rep
4, 3730 (2014).

18. M. Neumann, V. Muller, H. A. Kretzschmar, C. Haass, P. J. Kahle,
    Regional distribution

of proteinase K-resistant alpha-synuclein correlates with Lewy body
disease stage. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63, 1225-1235 (2004). E. Kovari
et al., Lewy body densities in the entorhinal and anterior cingulate
cortex predict cognitive deficits in Parkinson’s disease. Acta
Neuropathol 106, 83-88 (2003). L. Silveira-Moriyama et al., Regional
differences in the severity of Lewy body pathology across the olfactory
cortex. Neurosci Lett 453, 77-80 (2009). Y. C. Wong, D. Krainc,
alpha-synuclein toxicity in neurodegeneration: mechanism and therapeutic
strategies. Nat Med 23, 1-13 (2017). B. Dehay et al., Pathogenic
lysosomal depletion in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci 30, 12535-12544
(2010).

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

928 929 930 931 932 933 934 935 936 937 938 939 940 941 942 943 944 945
946 947 948 949 950 951 952 953 954 955 956 957 958 959 960 961 962 963
964 965 966 967 968 969 970 971 972 973 974 975 976 977

23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 

C. Cook, L. Petrucelli, A critical evaluation of the
ubiquitin-proteasome system in Parkinson’s disease. Biochim Biophys Acta
1792, 664-675 (2009). S. Kaushik, A. M. Cuervo, Proteostasis and aging.
Nat Med 21, 1406-1415 (2015). E. C. Hirsch, S. Vyas, S. Hunot,
Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 18
Suppl 1, S210-212 (2012). D. T. Dexter et al., Alterations in the levels
of iron, ferritin and other trace metals in Parkinson’s disease and
other neurodegenerative diseases affecting the basal ganglia. Brain 114
( Pt 4), 1953-1975 (1991). K. Du, M. Y. Liu, X. Zhong, M. J. Wei,
Decreased circulating Zinc levels in Parkinson’s disease: a
meta-analysis study. Sci Rep 7, 3902 (2017). J. Y. Lee et al., Cytosolic
labile zinc accumulation in degenerating dopaminergic neurons of mouse
brain after MPTP treatment. Brain Res 1286, 208-214 (2009). C. T.
Sheline, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, C. Shi, A. L. Cai, Mitochondrial inhibitor
models of Huntington’s disease and Parkinson’s disease induce zinc
accumulation and are attenuated by inhibition of zinc neurotoxicity in
vitro or in vivo. Neurodegener Dis 11, 49-58 (2013).

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. M. Bourdenx et al., Lack of additive role of ageing in nigrostriatal
    neurodegeneration triggered by alpha-synuclein overexpression. Acta
    Neuropathol Commun 3, 46 (2015). G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, in Knowledge
    Discovery in Databases, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, W. J. Frawley, Eds.
    (AAAI/MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1991). J. P. Bolam, E. K. Pissadaki,
    Living on the edge with too many mouths to feed: why dopamine
    neurons die. Mov Disord 27, 1478-1483 (2012). D. J. Surmeier, J. A.
    Obeso, G. M. Halliday, Selective neuronal vulnerability in Parkinson
    disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 18, 101-113 (2017). I. Carballo-Carbajal
    et al., Brain tyrosinase overexpression implicates age-dependent
    neuromelanin production in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis. Nat
    Commun 10, 973 (2019). J. A. Rodriguez et al., Structure of the
    toxic core of alpha-synuclein from invisible crystals. Nature 525,
    486-490 (2015).

35. 

36. 

37. M. D. Tuttle et al., Solid-state NMR structure of a pathogenic
    fibril of full-length human

38. 

39. 

40. 

alpha-synuclein. Nat Struct Mol Biol 23, 409-415 (2016). L. Bousset et
al., Structural and functional characterization of two alpha-synuclein
strains. Nat Commun 4, 2575 (2013). Y. Li et al., Amyloid fibril
structure of alpha-synuclein determined by cryo-electron microscopy.
Cell Res, (2018). R. Guerrero-Ferreira et al., Cryo-EM structure of
alpha-synuclein fibrils. Elife 7, (2018).

39. 

40. M. Koch, Artificial Intelligence Is Becoming Natural. Cell 173,
    531-533 (2018). D. M. Camacho, K. M. Collins, R. K. Powers, J. C.
    Costello, J. J. Collins, Next-

41. Generation Machine Learning for Biological Networks. Cell 173,
    1581-1592 (2018). T. M. Malta et al., Machine Learning Identifies
    Stemness Features Associated with Oncogenic Dedifferentiation. Cell
    173, 338-354 e315 (2018). A. Esteva et al., Dermatologist-level
    classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature 542,
    115-118 (2017). L. I. Kuncheva, J. J. Rodriguez, On feature
    selection protocols for very low-sample-size data. Pattern
    Recognition 81, 660-673 (2018). D. Castelvecchi, Can we open the
    black box of AI? Nature 538, 20-23 (2016). E. Diguet et al.,
    Deleterious effects of minocycline in animal models of Parkinson’s
    disease and Huntington’s disease. Eur J Neurosci 19, 3266-3276
    (2004). E. Diguet, C. E. Gross, F. Tison, E. Bezard, Rise and fall
    of minocycline in neuroprotection: need to promote publication of
    negative results. Exp Neurol 189, 1-4 (2004).

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

978 979 980 981 982 983 984 985 986 987 988 989 990 991 992 993 994 995
996 997 998 999 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010
1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024
1025 1026

48. 

R. Aron Badin, M. Vadori, E. Cozzi, P. Hantraye, Translational research
for Parkinsons disease: The value of pre-clinical primate models. Eur J
Pharmacol 759, 118-126 (2015).

49. M. Ahmed et al., Lentiviral overexpression of GRK6 alleviates
    L-dopa-induced

50. 

51. 

52. 

dyskinesia in experimental Parkinson’s disease. Sci Transl Med 2, 28ra28
(2010). S. Fasano et al., Inhibition of Ras-guanine nucleotide-releasing
factor 1 (Ras-GRF1) signaling in the striatum reverts motor symptoms
associated with L-dopa-induced dyskinesia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107,
21824-21829 (2010). G. Porras et al., PSD-95 expression controls l-DOPA
dyskinesia through dopamine D1 receptor trafficking. J Clin Invest 122,
3977-3989 (2012). N. M. Urs et al., Targeting beta-arrestin2 in the
treatment of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson’s disease. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 112, E2517-2526 (2015).

53. M. Bidinosti et al., Novel one-step immunoassays to quantify
    alpha-synuclein:

54. 

applications for biomarker development and high-throughput screening. J
Biol Chem 287, 33691-33705 (2012). G. Zandomeneghi, M. R. Krebs, M. G.
McCammon, M. Fandrich, FTIR reveals structural differences between
native beta-sheet proteins and amyloid fibrils. Protein Sci 13, 3314-
3321 (2004).

55. W. Dauer et al., Resistance of alpha -synuclein null mice to the
    parkinsonian neurotoxin

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

MPTP. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99, 14524-14529 (2002). J. Altmann,
Observational study of behavior: sampling methods. Behaviour 49, 227-267
(1974). S. M. Camus, C. Blois-Heulin, Q. Li, M. Hausberger, E. Bezard,
Behavioural profiles in captive-bred cynomolgus macaques: towards monkey
models of mental disorders? PLoS One 8, e62141 (2013). S. M. Camus et
al., Birth origin differentially affects depressive-like behaviours: are
captive-born cynomolgus monkeys more vulnerable to depression than their
wild-born counterparts? PLoS One 8, e67711 (2013). S. M. Camus et al.,
Depressive-like behavioral profiles in captive-bred single- and
socially-housed rhesus and cynomolgus macaques: a species comparison.
Front Behav Neurosci 8, 47 (2014). F. N. Soria et al.,
Glucocerebrosidase deficiency in dopaminergic neurons induces microglial
activation without neurodegeneration. Hum Mol Genet 26, 2603-2615
(2017). P. Chomczynski, N. Sacchi, Single-step method of RNA isolation
by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal
Biochem 162, 156-159 (1987). S. A. Bustin et al., The MIQE guidelines:
minimum information for publication of quantitative real-time PCR
experiments. Clin Chem 55, 611-622 (2009). K. J. Livak, T. D.
Schmittgen, Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time
quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods 25,
402-408 (2001). E. A. Waxman, B. I. Giasson, Specificity and regulation
of casein kinase-mediated phosphorylation of alpha-synuclein. J
Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67, 402-416 (2008). N. N. Vaikath et al.,
Generation and characterization of novel conformation-specific
monoclonal antibodies for alpha-synuclein pathology. Neurobiol Dis 79,
81-99 (2015).

67. 

68. M. Helwig et al., Brain propagation of transduced alpha-synuclein
    involves non-fibrillar protein species and is enhanced in
    alpha-synuclein null mice. Brain 139, 856-870 (2016). J. F.
    Mosselmans et al., I18–the microfocus spectroscopy beamline at the
    Diamond Light Source. J Synchrotron Radiat 16, 818-824 (2009). V. A.
    Solé, Papillon, E., M. Cotte, P. Walter, J. Susini, A multiplatform
    code for the analysis of energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence
    spectra. Spectrochimica Acta Part B: Atomic Spectroscopy 62, 63-68
    (2007).

69. 

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

69. 

D. M. de Freitas Silva, V. P. Ferraz, A. M. Ribeiro, Improved
high-performance liquid chromatographic method for GABA and glutamate
determination in regions of the rodent brain. J Neurosci Methods 177,
289-293 (2009).

70. M. Marti, C. Trapella, R. Viaro, M. Morari, The nociceptin/orphanin
    FQ receptor

antagonist J-113397 and L-DOPA additively attenuate experimental
parkinsonism through overinhibition of the nigrothalamic pathway. J
Neurosci 27, 1297-1307 (2007). E. Jones, E. Oliphant, P. Peterson, e.
al. (2001). S. van der Walt, S. C. Colbert, G. Varoquaux, The NumPy
Array: A Structure for Efficient Numerical Computation. Computing in
Science and Engineering 13, 22-30 (2011). J. D. HUnter, Matplotlib: A 2D
graphics environment. Computing in Science and Engineering 9, 90-95
(2007). S. B. Plaisier, R. Taschereau, J. A. Wong, T. G. Graeber,
Rank-rank hypergeometric overlap: identification of statistically
significant overlap between gene-expression signatures. Nucleic Acids
Res 38, e169 (2010). R. C. Team, R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria, 2016).

71. 
72. 
73. 
74. 
75. 

1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040
1041 1042 1043 1044

1045

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS : The authors wish to express their gratitude to Pr.
Alan R. Crossman

1046

(University of Manchester, UK) for his comments for his language
supervision. We also thank Dr. 

1047

Marion Bosc (Cold Spring Harbor, USA) for valuable comments on the
manuscript. The authors

1048

thank Carmen Lagares Martínez (Head, Veterinary Service, University of
Murcia) for

1049

administrative assistance; Maria Fermina Ros Romero and Josefa Martínez
Rabadán (University of

1050

Murcia) for veterinary and husbandry support; Ana Luisa Gil, Lorena
Cuenca and Ignacio

1051

Mascarell from Clinical and Experimental Neuroscience group (University
of Murcia) for their

1052

technical help with various parts of the In Vivo part of these complex
experiments. We would like

1053

to thank Dr. Philippe Hantraye (MIRCen) for providing baboon
stereotactic frame. The University

1054

of Bordeaux and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
provided infrastructural support.

1055

Funding: This work was supported by a grant from the Michael J Fox
Foundation (Project Grant

1056

No. 2013-8499), Fundacion de Investigacion HM Hospitales (Madrid,
Spain), the Fundación

1057

Séneca (Project Grant No: FS19540/PI/14), the TARGET PD ANR grant and
The Simone and Cino

1058

Del Duca Prize from French Academy of Sciences. MB and MLA were
supported by a Ministère

1059

de l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche fellowship and the France
Parkinson Foundation

1060

(MB). The help of the Bordeaux Imaging Center, part of the national
infrastructure France

1061

BioImaging, granted by ANR-10INBS-04-0, is acknowledged. The Human
α-Synuclein

1062

aggregation TR-FRET immunoassay was done in the Biochemistry and
Biophysics Platform of the

1063

Bordeaux Neurocampus at the Bordeaux University funded by the LABEX
BRAIN (ANR-10-

1064

LABX-43) with the help of Y. Rufin. Computing time for this study was
provided by MCIA

1065

(Mesocentre de Calcul Intensif Aquitain), the public research HPC-center
in Aquitaine, France. The

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1066

samples were obtained from the Brain Bank GIE NeuroCEB (BRIF number
0033-00011), funded

1067

by the patients’ associations France Alzheimer, France Parkinson, ARSEP,
and “Connaître les

1068

Syndromes Cérébelleux” to which we express our gratitude. The
synchrotron Diamond is

1069

acknowledged for provision of beam time (exp. SP13009).

1070

Author contributions: M.B., M.V., J.O., P.D., B.D. and E.B. conceived
and designed the study.

1071

M.B., G.P., I.T.D., C.E., N.G.C., M.T.H., B.D. and E.B. performed
surgeries. S.C. and C.E.

1072

performed behavioral analysis. M.G. set up the actimetry behavioral
platform. S.D., A.P. and P.A.

1073

performed histologic and immunohistochemical analysis of the data. S.D.,
A.P. and M.L.A.

1074

performed imaging experiments. E.D. performed electron microscopy
analysis. F.L., M.L.A. and

1075

M.L.T. performed biochemistry experiments. C.P. performed and analyzed
primary cultures

1076

experiment. S.B. and B.D. performed synchrotron analysis. C.S. performed
infrared microscopy.

1077

N.K. and B.M. performed biological fluids analysis. S.N. and M.M.
performed HPLC analysis.

1078

T.L.L. performed mRNA extraction and qPCR analysis. M.B., A.N., S.D.,
M.L.A., S.C., N.P.R.,

1079

S.B., C.S., F.L., N.K., B.M., S.N., M.M., C.P., A.R., N.N.V. and O.E.A.,
M.T.H., P.D., M.V.,

1080

J.O., B.D. and E.B. analyzed the data. M.B., A.N. and N.P.R. developed
the MLP approach. M.B.,

1081

M.V., J.O., B.D. and E.B. wrote the paper. B.D. and E.B. supervised the
project. All authors

1082

discussed the results, assisted in the preparation and contributed to
the manuscript. All authors

1083

approved the final version of the manuscript.

1084

Competing interests: E. Bezard is a director and a shareholder of Motac
neuroscience Ltd. All the

1085

other authors have no conflict of interest to disclose.

1086

Data and materials availability: The entire raw data set is made
available to the readers (Table

1087

S2). Authors chose not to provide representative examples of each
procedure for the sake of space

1088

and because the entire data set is fully disclosed. Further information
and requests for examples

1089

should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Corresponding
Contacts. Hyperlink to the machine-

1090

learning

code

(10.5281/zenodo.1240558)

is

provided

1091

(https://zenodo.org/record/1240558#.XC8pqy17Su4).

1092

1093

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1094

FIGURES

1095

1096

1097

Fig. 1. Purification and characterization of Lewy bodies (LB) and noLB
inocula from

1098

Parkinson disease (PD) brains. (A, left) Immunohistochemistry image of
a-synuclein–positive

1099

LB (arrows) in nigral postmortem brain samples (PD #1; a-synuclein in
brown, neuromelanin in

1100

dark-brown) before sucrose gradient purification. The pie chart
indicates the relative contribution

1101

of the 5 patients to the final pool of LB and noLB inocula (A, middle)
Schematic representation of

1102

the sucrose gradient fractionation procedure used to purify
LB/noLB-containing fractions from

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1103

freshly frozen postmortem nigral brain tissue of 5 sporadic PD patients.
(A, right) Filter retardation

1104

assay probed with a human a-synuclein antibody to assess the presence of
a-synuclein aggregates

1105

in the different fractions obtained by sucrose gradient fractionation
from freshly frozen postmortem

1106

nigral brain tissue from sporadic PD patients (PD #1). Green rectangle
indicates noLB-containing

1107

fraction and blue rectangle highlights LB-containing fraction selected
to prepare the mixture used

1108

for injections. (B) Confocal examination of purified noLB and LB
fractions with a-syn

1109

immunofluorescence (red) and thioflavin S staining (green). Both LB and
noLB present thioflavin

1110

S-positive aggregates but much smaller in noLB fractions. Scale bar =
10µm. (C) Ultrastructural

1111

examination of noLB and LB fractions by electron microscopy showing
massive fibrils in LB

1112

fractions while noLB fractions contain, besides soluble a-syn, some
punctiform small size

1113

aggregates. (D) NoLB and LB fractions derived from PD brains (left
panel) were treated with 1

1114

µg/ml proteinase K for 0, 15, 30, 45 and 60 min and analyzed by
immunoblotting with syn211

1115

antibody. The EC50 value was determined as the concentration at which
this ratio is decreased by

1116

50%. The corresponding EC50 value for LB (>60 min) was approximately
fourfold greater than

1117

with noLB

(15.23 min)

(E) NoLB and LB

fractions were

treated

for 6h with

1118

increasing concentrations of either urea or SDS or buffer as control.
Syn211 was used to detect the

1119

forms of α-synuclein. The LB fractions appear to be more resistant to
breakdown compared with

1120

noLB fractions in both urea (F(1,8)=6.063, p=0.0392) and SDS treatments
(F(1,12)=17.41, p=0.0013).

1121

The dotted line show levels of control fractions. Comparison were made
using Two-Way ANOVA.

1122

(F) TR-FRET immunoassay analysis of noLB and LB fractions. Fluorescence
    measurements were

1123

taken 20h after antibody. Analysis by unpaired Student’s t-test
(t(7)=2,623, p=0,0343). *: P<0.05.

1124

Mean ± SEM, n=4-5. (G) Representative pictures of tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH)-positive substantia

1125

nigra pars compacta (SNpc) neurons (brown; Nissl staining in purple) in
non-injected, noLB or LB-

1126

injected mice at 4 months after injections. Scale bars=500µm. (H)
Quantification of TH-positive

1127

Substantia Nigra pars compacta (SNpc) neurons by stereology in control,
LB- and noLB-injected

1128

mice. Control mice, n=10, LB-injected mice at 4 months, n=10,
No-LB-injected mice at 4 months,

1129

n=10. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey test for multiple comparisons. *:
p<0.05 compared

1130

with control and noLB-injected side at 4 months.

1131

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1132

1133

1134

Fig. 2. Intrastriatal injection of Lewy bodies (LB) and noLB fractions
from Parkinson’s

1135

disease patients induces nigrostriatal neurodegeneration in baboon
monkeys. (A) Tyrosine

1136

hydroxylase (TH) staining at striatum and Substantia Nigra pars compacta
(SNpc) levels. A green

1137

fire blue LUT (lookup table) was used to enhance contrast and highlight
the difference between

1138

non-injected, LB-injected and noLB-injected baboon monkeys at striatum
level. Scale bars = 5mm

1139

(striatum) and 10µm (SNpc). (B) Scatter plot of TH immunostaining in
SNpc. F(2,14)=9.439,

1140

p=0.0025. Control vs LB-injected: p=0.0029. Control vs noLB- injected:
p=0.0248. (C, D) Scatter

1141

plots of mean grey values of striatal TH immunoreactivity in the putamen
(F(2,14)=7.313, p=0.0067;

1142

Control vs LB-injected: p=0.0059) (C) and in the caudate (F(2,14)=16.25,
p=0.0002; Control vs LB-

1143

injected: p=0.0008; Control vs noLB- injected: p=0.0008) (D) in non-
injected, LB-injected and

1144

noLB-injected baboon monkeys. The horizontal line indicates the average
value per group ± SEM

1145

(n=7 from control animals; n=6 for LB-injected animals; n=4 for
noLB-injected animals).

1146

Comparison were made using One-Way ANOVA and Tukey’s correction for
multiple comparison.

1147

*p< 0.05 compared with control animals.

1148

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1149

1150

1151

Fig. 3. Multiple-layer perceptron (MLP)-based identification of specific
signature. (A) Several

1152

endpoints (n=180) were measured using multiple methods (colors).
Endpoints can be grouped as

1153

clusters: 1. Dopaminergic degeneration, 2. Behavior, 3. a-syn-related
pathology. 4. Non-a-syn

1154

related pathology. 5. Putative biomarkers. (B) Multiple brain regions
(n=40) were investigated from

1155

coronal sections at 2 levels: anterior commissure (ac.) -3mm (striatum,
entorhinal cortex) and -7mm

1156

(SNpc, hippocampus). (C) Detailed methodology. 1. Representative scheme
of one MLP predicting

1157

3 neurodegeneration-related variables (ND1, ND2, ND3) with 3
experimental variables as input

1158

(var1, var2, var3). Out of the 180 variables measured in total, 163 were
used as inputs for the MLP.

1159

2.  One MLP was trained for every unique combination of 3 variables. 3.
    Combinations were ranked

1160

based on their prediction error and top1% were selected for further
analysis. 4. Combinations were

1161

deconvoluted to extract single variables and count occurrence of
individual variables. 5. Variables

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1162

were sorted based on the number of occurrences in the top1% of the best
combination. (D) Raw

1163

ranking obtained for LB-injected animals. Color code highlights
measurement methods as in A. (E)

1164

Raw ranking obtained for noLB-injected animals. Color code highlights
measurement methods as

1165

in A.

1166

1167

1168

1169

Fig. 4. Direct comparison of MLP-derived signatures shows specific
pattern between

1170

experiment groups. (A) Rank-rank hypergeometric overlap (RRHO) test
between variable sorting

1171

of LB and noLB-injected animals. Highly enriched variables are in the
lower left corner. Diagonal

1172

(highlighted by a red dashed line) was extracted to do a bin-to-bin
comparison between LB and

1173

noLB signatures. (B) Signatures were aligned with RRHO and show low
similarity in highly

1174

enriched variables (light orange background) and higher similarity for
lower rank variables (pale

1175

blue background). (C, D) First 20 enriched variables for both
LB-injected animals (C) and noLB-

1176

injected animals (D). Color code is similar to Fig. 2A. Detailed of
variable names can be found in

1177

Table S1. Bars are mean +/- 99% confidence interval estimated by
bootstrap.

1178

1179

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1180

1181

1182

Fig. 5. Levels of a-synuclein and phosphorylated a-synuclein in
different brain regions. (A)

1183

Heat map representing the surface of α-synuclein (a-syn) and S129
phosphorylated α-syn

1184

immunostaining intensity in the brain of non-inoculated, LB-inoculated
and noLB-inoculated

1185

baboon monkeys. The heat maps show all brain regions measured and are
organized according in

1186

3 main groups: cortical, basal ganglia and sub-cortical areas. From top
to bottom: cingulate cortex

1187

(ctx.cg), sensorimotor cortex (ctx.sm), retro-insular cortex
(ctx.retins), parahippocampal cortex

1188

(ctx.phipp), entorhinal cortex (ctx.ent), hippocampus (hipp), caudate
nucleus (cd), putamen (put),

1189

substantia nigra (sn), ventral tegmental area (vta), red nucleus (rn),
subthalamic nucleus (stn),

1190

lateral dorsal nucleus (ldn), lateral geniculate nucleus (cgen),
claustrum (cltm), fornix (frx), white

1191

matter (wm), corpus callosum (corcal). The color bars represent the log2
value of the ratio of each

1192

brain regions. (B) Representative pictures of a-syn (a-syn) and
phosphorylated a-syn (pSyn S129)

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1193

staining in the entorhinal and parahippocampal cortices. (C, D)
Correlation between levels of

1194

phosphorylated a-syn in the parahippocampal cortex (C) and the
entorhinal cortex (D) with levels

1195

of TH staining in the substantia nigra. Dotted line indicates the linear
regression. Gray area indicates

1196

the 95% confidence interval around of the linear regression.

1197

1198

1199

1200

1201

Fig. 6. Association metric shows independence of strong predictors and
beneficial association

1202

of weaker predictors. Both network plots were build using number of
counts in the top1% as node

1203

size and color, and lift (association measure) as edges. To allow better
visualization, only 10% of

bioRxiv preprint this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the
author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made available under CC-BY-NC 4.0 International
license .

https://doi.org/10.1101/825216

doi:

a

;

1204

the strongest edges are shown. (A) Network plot for LB-injected animals
showing independence

1205

of strong predictors: S129 phosphorylated a-syn (psyn) in the entorhinal
(h.psyn.ctx.er) and the

1206

para-hippocampal cortex (h.psyn.ctx.phipp), microglia-activation in the
putamen (h.iba1.put), a-

1207

syn in the cingulate cortex (h.syn.ctx.cg) and the supplementary motor
area (h.syn.ctx.sma) and

1208

GABA levels in the internal part of the globus pallidus (hlpc.gaba.gpi).
Upper right box highlights

1209

association between actimetry measure (actim) and a scan-sampling
measure of body direction

1210

toward a closed environment (ss.enf) with a-syn levels in the caudate
nucleus (h.syn.cd), the red

1211

nucleus (h.syn.rn) and psyn in the sensorimotor cortex (h.psyn.ctx.sm).
Lower right box highlights

1212

association between pathological a-syn in the putamen (wb.syn.put and
db.syn.put) and the SNpc

1213

(db.syn.sn) as well as psyn in the ventral tegmental area (h.psyn.vta)
and peripheral levels of a-syn

1214

in the plasma (bm.plasma). (B) Network plot for noLB-injected animals
showing independence of

1215

strong predictors: levels of Zn in the SNpc (s.zn.sn), pathological
a-syn in the putamen (db.syn.put),

1216

a-syn in the supplementary motor area (h.syn.ctx.sma) and aggregated
a-syn in the SNpc

1217

(wb.synHMW.sn). Upper left box highlights association between
autophagosomes (wb.lc3.put) and

1218

lysosomes (wb.lamp2.put) levels in the putamen and a-syn in the SNpc
(wb.syn.sn). Lower left box

1219

highlights association between GABA levels in the internal part of the
globus pallidus

1220

(hlpc.gaba.gpi), a-syn in the caudate nucleus (wb.syn.cd) and microglia
activation in the entorhinal

1221

cortex (h.iba1.ctx.er). Lower right box highlights association between
soluble (wb.syn.putc) and

1222

aggregated (wb.synHMW.putc) levels of a-syn in the putamen.

1223

1224

Supplementary Materials:

1225

Table S1. List of variables used in multiple-layer perceptron analyses.

1226

Table S2. Raw data that served for the multiple-layer perceptron
analyses for all behavioral,

1227

histological, biochemical, transcriptional and biophysical approaches
(applied to several brain

1228

areas, totalizing the quantification of 180 variables for each
individual).


