Factors affecting reward based decision making :
a computational study
Bhargav Teja Nallapu1,2,3, Bapi Raju Surampudi1, Nicolas P. Rougier2,3,4

1 - International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad
2 - INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest Research Center, Talence, France
3 - IMN, Université de Bordeaux CNRS UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France
4 - LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux CNRS UMR 5800, Bordeaux, France

Contact : bhargav.teja@research.iiit.ac.in

Abstract

Basal Ganglia (BG) are known to be responsible for action selection, decision 
making and reward based learning in a changing environment. Using a 
biologically plausible model, we have been investigating some external and 
internal factors related to the stimulus representation that might affect the 
decision making and action selection. We used a computational model of the 
cerebral structure BG, inspired and replicated from Guthrie et al, 2013 and a two-
armed bandit task described in Pasquereau et al. 2007. The task is a probabilistic 
learning task where stimuli are 4 different shapes associated with different reward 
probabilities upon selection. At a time, two of the shapes are presented in two 
distinct positions and the model is expected to make an action to select one of 
the presented shapes. Upon repeated trials and presented reward after each 
selection, the model learns the best rewarding cue and is expected to choose the 
best rewarding cue always thereafter.
One of the questions we attempt to address is to what extent the physical 
properties of the stimulus like its visual salience, affect the decision to overcome 
the impact of reward associated to the stimuli. Early results show that there can 
be an influence of some external and internal factors leading the model to take a 
bad decision when the worst choice (less rewarding) is presented before the best 
choice (more rewarding) or the worst choice is more salient than the best one or 
even if the model learns the reward probabilities associated not to the cue 
shapes, but to the position where the stimulus is shown.

structures. These 

Model: A cortico-basal ganglial model with 
structures are 
5 
connected through cognitive and motor 
decision 
is 
represented by one neuron, at every 
structure.

loops. Each 

stimulus 

EXCITATORY

INHIBITORY

EXTERNAL

E
C
R
U
O
S

T
E
G
R
A
T

STN 
motor

STN 
cognitive

External current

External current

External current

Cortex 
motor

Cortex 
associative

Cortex 
cognitive

Learning is then disabled and the model is tested using always the same pair of cues A 
( P(R)=1 ) and B ( P(R)=0.33 ) in the presence of external factors. We study how, despite 
reward based learning, visual salience of the stimuli and the temporal difference between 
stimulus presentations affect the model to take a sub-optimal decision.

Factors : In scenario 1, the stimulus known to be lesser rewarding is presented with higher 
visual salience than that of the higher rewarding stimulus. In scenario 2, only the lesser 
rewarding stimulus is presented at the beginning of trial, and few milliseconds later, the 
higher rewarding stimulus is presented.

Scenario 1

Figure 1 : Cue 'A' has the best rewarding probability of 1 and cue 'B' is less rewarding, with 
a probability of 0.33. The model is correct if it selects A when presented with A and B. When 
stimulus B is presented with higher salience than A (bigger in size, for illustrative purposes), 
the performance of the model decreases as salience of B increases. It can be observed that 
when the salience of B is 30% more than that of A, performance of the model decreases to 
as low as 0.20

Scenario 2

Neuronal dynamics: Each neuron in the 
model is a rate coded neuron, governed by 
the equation:

Striatum 
motor

Striatum 
associative

Striatum 
cognitive

decay time constant of the synaptic input 
τ , negative values of activation, m and 
threshold of the neuron T are set to 
respective constant values as per 
Guthrie's model

GPi 
motor

GPi 
cognitive

Thalamus 
motor

Thalamus 
cognitive

Task: The task is a probabilistic learning task as described in Pasquereau et al., 2007 where 
four visual cues are associated with different reward probabilities (0.00, 0.33, 0.66 & 1.00). A 
trial is made of the simultaneous presentation of two random cues with equal salience at two 
random positions. Some time after the presentation, a switch in the cortex activities is 
observed, representing the decision taken. After the model has chosen one cue or the other, 
a reward is given according to the probability associated with the chosen cue. Connections 
between the cortex and the striatum are then modified using a reinforcement learning rule 
based on the reward signal. The model is trained over 120 trials such that each combination 
of cues is presented equal number of times at uniformly sampled positions and the model 
performance reaches at least 0.9 measuring the ration of optimal choices. The decision 
switch and the performance are identical to the results when primates are tested with same 
task.

Cortex activity of all the channels over a 
single trial. After both the stimuli are 
presented after 500 ms, a switch in the 
activity of corresponding channels can 
be observed, leading the model to take 
a decision.

After learning based on the reward 
received after each trial, the model 
learns to choose the best rewarding 
stimulus always. When 
tested with 
same task, primates performed similar 
to the way model predicted.

Figure 2 : Cue 'A' has the best rewarding probability of 1 and cue 'B' is less rewarding, with 
a probability of 0.33.The model is correct if it selects A when presented with A and B. When 
only stimulus B is presented at first, then after a certain delay stimulus A is presented, the 
performance of the model decreases as the delay increases.

Results : Results furnished above are of the model. The model is already tested to have a 
consistent performance greater than 0.9 after 120 trials of learning, under conditions of 
simultaneous presentation of two equally salient stimuli. These early results suggest that 
such external factors could reduce the performance of the model. Primates have not been 
tested yet under the scenarios presented here.

Conclusions : The decrease in performance explains why primates can never achieve the 
best performance as the stimuli in reality are under such influencing factors. However, it 
raises the following questions about the scope and nature of decision making:

➢

➢

What is an appropriate representation of a stimulus and its salient features (size, color, 
shape etc.) and their role in overlooking the value of the action while decision making?
When there is only one stimulus, having known there could be a higher rewarding one

●

●

what is the time before which the higher rewarding stimulus should be shown, 
that it could be chosen? 
how is the decision making process altered when the second stimulus is 
presented?

Ongoing work : In our ongoing work, we have been working on a similar model with a larger 
population of neurons in each structure. Such a larger population model is not only 
biologically more plausible, but also provides for more extensive input representations and 
requires realistic connectivity. Early results show that such a largely populated model is able 
to learn and perform at around 0.8 accuracy, with certain connectivities assumed.

Acknowledgements : The authors would like to acknowledge the funds received from 
Centre Franco-Indien pour la Promotion de la Recherche Avancée (CEFIPRA) under the 
project DST-INRIA 2013-02/Basal Ganglia.

References :
[1] Martin Guthrie, Arthur Leblois, Andŕe Garenne, and Thomas Boraud, Interaction between cognitive and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision making: a computational study. 
Journal of neurophysiology,109(12):3025–3040, 2013.
[2] Arthur Leblois, Thomas Boraud, Wassilios Meissner, Hagai Bergman and David Hansel, Competition between feedback loops underlies normal and pathological dynamics in the basal ganglia. 
The Journal of Neuroscience, 26(13):3567–3583, 2006.
[3] Benjamin Pasquereau, Agnes Nadjar, David Arkadir, Erwan Bezard, Michel Goillandeau, Bernard Bioulac, Christian Eric Gross, and Thomas Boraud, Shaping of motor responses by incentive 
values through the basal ganglia. The Journal of neuroscience, 27(5):1176–1183, 2007.

