A Simple Reservoir Model of Working Memory with
Real Values
Anthony Strock, Nicolas P. Rougier, Xavier Hinaut

To cite this version:

Anthony Strock, Nicolas P. Rougier, Xavier Hinaut. A Simple Reservoir Model of Working Memory
with Real Values. 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Jul 2018, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil. ￿10.1109/IJCNN.2018.8489262￿. ￿hal-01803594￿

HAL Id: hal-01803594

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01803594

Submitted on 15 Jun 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

A Simple Reservoir Model of Working Memory
with Real Values

Anthony Strock2,1,3, Nicolas P. Rougier1,2,3 and Xavier Hinaut1,2,3,∗
1- INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France
2- LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR 5800, Talence, France
3- IMN, Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France
∗ Corresponding author

Abstract—The prefrontal cortex is known to be involved in many
in particular, working memory.
high-level cognitive functions,
Here, we study to what extent a group of randomly connected
units (namely an Echo State Network, ESN) can store and main-
tain (as output) an arbitrary real value from a streamed input,
i.e. can act as a sustained working memory unit. Furthermore, we
explore to what extent such an architecture can take advantage
of the stored value in order to produce non-linear computations.
Comparison between different architectures (with and without
feedback, with and without a working memory unit) shows that
an explicit memory improves the performances.

Keywords—Working Memory, Gated Memory, Reservoir Computing,
Prefrontal Cortex, Echo State Networks, ESN

I.

INTRODUCTION

Prefrontal cortex (PFC), noteworthy for its highly recurrent
connections [9], is involved in many high level capabilities,
such as decision making [1], working memory [9], goal-
directed behavior [23], temporal organisation and reasoning
[7]. Romo et al. [26] have shown that PFC neurons of non-
human primate can maintain information about a stimulus
for several seconds. Their ﬁring rate was correlated with the
coding of a speciﬁc dimension (frequency) of the stimulus
maintained in memory. When Machens et al. [20] later re-
analyzed the data of this experiment, they showed that the
stimulus was actually encoded over a subpopulation using
a distributed representation. Similarly, when Rigotti et al.
[25] analyzed single neuron activity recorded in the lateral
PFC of monkeys performing complex cognitive tasks, they
found several neurons displaying task-related activity. Once
they discarded all the neurons that were displaying a task-
they were still able to decode task infor-
related activity,
mation with a linear decoder and proposed that
the PFC
hosts high-dimensional linear and non-linear mixed-selectivity
activity. Here, we can draw an interesting parallel between this
linear-decoder analysis and the reservoir computer paradigm
as originally proposed by [3, 5, 14, 19]. In computational
neuroscience, reservoirs are often used as models of generic
neural circuits [13, 19, 28]. In particular, several authors used
them to model cortical areas such as PFC [5, 6, 10, 21, 11].

Bechara et al. [1] showed that working memory and decision
making depend on separate anatomical PFC substrates. Corres-
pondingly, Dambre et al. [4] demonstrated the existence of a
universal trade-off between the non-linearity of the computa-
tion and the short-term memory in the information process-
ing capacity of any dynamical systems, including echo state
networks [14]. In other words, the hyperparameters used to

generate an optimal reservoir for solving a given memory task
would not be optimal for a non-linear computation task. This
conclusion is quite puzzling when one considers models such
as long short-term memory (LSTM) networks [8, 12] that have
been shown to solve complex tasks with long-term temporal
dependencies1. However, these models take advantage of an
explicit gating mechanism inside each unit in order to store
values for long periods of time2. The LSTM network uses
explicitly engineered units that enables to store a value for
long time spans by the use of gating mechanism. However,
there is no reason to think that the brain has such engineered
mechanisms, especially because the learning algorithm, back
propagation through time (BPTT) [30], is unfolding time: this
would be like if the brain could virtually duplicate it state
values (for hundreds or more time points) in order to learn a
particular time-dependency between two events for instance.
With this study (and future ones) we want to explore how this
gating mechanism could be performed without such engineered
mechanisms, and explore how it could be performed with
populations of neurons with less a priori constraints (e.g.
random RNNs).

In the meantime, Jaeger [15] explored the capabilities of an
ESN to maintain temporal information during long time spans
and to exploit it for solving speciﬁc tasks. He considered the
suite of synthetic tasks originally proposed by Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber [12] in order to test their LSTM model. These
synthetic tasks were also reused by Martens and Sutskever
[22] using an Hessian-free optimization of Recurrent neural
networks (RNN). Jaeger [15] showed that a correctly de-
signed ESN could handle such tasks with the same success
criteria originally proposed by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
[12]. However, the study was limited to transient short-term
memory, and not on “attractor-like” working memory mech-
anisms. Conversely, other studies have focused on reservoirs
with dedicated outputs acting as working memory (WM) units
[13, 24], which exploit different sub-regions of the reservoir
high-dimensional space as “attractors” [29]. These working
memory units were trained to store binary values that were
input-dependent; these WM units had feedback connections
projecting to the reservoir. Thanks to these WM units,
it
enabled the reservoir to access and use such information,
freeing the system to rely only on the reservoir short-term
dynamics to maintain WM information. Pascanu and Jaeger

1Long-term temporal dependencies imply non-linear computations if units

have non-linear activation function.

2This does not actually refute the trade-off proposal by [4].

[24] used up to six binary WM units to store information in
order to solve a nested bracketing levels task. With a Principal
Component Analysis Pascanu and Jaeger [24] showed that such
binary WM units drive the reservoir in lower dimensional
“attractors”3. Additionally, Hoerzer et al. [13] showed that
analog WM units (but encoding a binary information) actually
drive the reservoir into a lower dimensional space (i.e. 99%
of the variability of the reservoir activities are explained by
fewer principal components when there is feedback from WM
units to the reservoir). In this study, we want to extrapolate
this idea of “attractor driven by WM units” to WM units that
have continuous values and not constrained to a population of
binary values.

The paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the
different
tasks and the reservoir design while Section III
introduced results on the different tasks. A discussion of the
study is given in Section IV.

II. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTS

In order to better understand the properties of working memory
mechanisms, we explore4 the idea of a reservoir model con-
nected to working memory (WM) units. More speciﬁcally, we
are interested in the capacity of a reservoir to store an arbitrary
information (e.g. a real value instead of binary values like
in [13, 24]) from a streamed input by using a trained gating-
like mechanism. As pictured in Table II, we will explore six
versions of a simple architecture composed of an Echo State
Network (ESN) and optionally a WM unit and/or an output
containing the result of a non-linear computation. In a ﬁrst
task, we consider a model with two inputs: random values in
[-1,1] changing over time and trigger events, signaling when to
store information. The output should be clamped to the value
given with the last trigger event: this forms a continuous WM
unit that will change its value each time a new trigger is given.
In a second task, we study the usefulness of such WM unit in
order to solve a nonlinear task: multiplication of the input by
the memorized value.

A. Model: Echo State Network

In this work we use an Echo State Network (ESN) [14]
with leaky neurons, and feedback from output to the reservoir
described by the following update equations:

the identity function clamped to −1 in ]−∞,-1] and to 1 in
[1, +∞[)5 are applied element-wise and α is the leaking rate.

The matrix W is ﬁrst randomly uniformly sampled between
−0.5 and 0.5 and then it is rescaled in order to set its maximal
absolute eigenvalue, a.k.a spectral radius, to the chosen one.
The matrices Win and Wfb are both sampled uniformly between
a value s and its opposite −s. These two values are respectively
called the input and the feedback scaling. In all the results, the
reservoir contains 100 neurons.

As illustrated in the ﬁgures of Table II, only the output weights
input, recurrent and feedback weight are
will be learned;
generated randomly and kept ﬁxed. The output weights are
learned using ridge regression with teacher forcing [18], like
stated in Equation 4. When there are two output weights to
train they are learned both at the same time considering the
output vector to be 2-dimensional.

Wout = Y X T (XX T + βI)−1

(4)

where X is the concatenation of the reservoir activities at all
time steps with a bias vector at 1, each row corresponding to a
time step. Similarly, Y is the concatenation of desired outputs
and β is the regularization parameter.

B. Task 1: Storing a triggered real value

For this ﬁrst task, the model used is the “Memory only”
architecture (see Table II). An example of the inputs and
outputs is shown in Figure 2.

In this task, the model receives two different kinds of inputs: an
input that indicates the value to be maintained when a trigger
occurs, and an input that indicates the triggers. Before the ﬁrst
trigger event, the value to be stored is zero. As can be seen in
Figure 1 three scenarios were studied.

x[n] = (1 − α)x[n − 1] + α˜x[n]
˜x[n] = tanh(W x[n − 1] + Win[1; u[n]] + Wfby[n − 1])
y[n] = f (Wout[1; x[n]])

(1)
(2)
(3)

where u[n], x[n] and y[n] are respectively the streamed input
vector, the vector containing the reservoir activations, and the
output vector at time n. W , Win, Wfb and Wout are respectively
the recurrent, the input, the feedback and the output weight
matrices. [.; .] stands for the concatenation of two vectors, tanh
(hyperbolic tangent function) and f (linear or piece-wise linear,

3The WM units drive the reservoir to particular sub-regions of the high-
dimensional space. These WM units act as “attractors” of the entire system,
ie. if no particular input is seen, the system stays in the same sub-region.

4The code and the details on the hyperparameters are available at

https://github.com/anthony-strock/ijcnn2018

Fig. 1: Three scenarios on which the trained models are tested.
A. Single update scenario. B. Periodic update scenario. C.
Continuous update scenario. Each column represents a time
step. First two lines: input composed of the values and the
trigger. Bottom line: desired output.

C. Task 2: Product of triggered value and current value

Here we study a variant of the previous task where the output is
a combination of the stored value and the current input signal.
The inputs are kept the same. At each time step, the readout
unit has to output the product of two values: the value of
the current time step and the value synchronized with the last
trigger (i.e. the stored/memorized value). As before when no

5f is chosen piece-wise linear only for Table I and Figure 3

DesiredTriggerValueADesiredTriggerValueBDesiredTriggerValueCtriggers occurred yet, the last value to be memorized should
be zero, and so does the product.

The motivation to study this task is as follows. If the previously
trigged value is available to the reservoir, the multiplication
task is trivial (such a case is called Oracle). However, if
this previously triggered value is not easily available, the task
becomes increasingly complicated as time runs, especially for
a reservoir of only 100 units. In order to explore and compare
the capabilities in different architectures (six in total, see
Table II), we make a combination of three different scenarios:

•

•

Value is obtained, as before, by sampling a uniformly
randomly distributed value between -1 and 1;

Trigger is obtained, unlike before, by choosing by
hand when the trigger occurs. For the single update
scenario (A) the trigger occurs only at time step 100.
For the periodic update scenario (B) the ﬁrst trigger
occurs at time step 100 and then a trigger occurs every
1000 time step. Finally, for the continuous update
scenario (C) the ﬁrst trigger occurs at time step 100
and triggers will occur at every time step after that.

•

•

•

No explicit memory: The model is trained only to
perform this task without any further help.

Trained explicit memory: The model is trained at the
same time to solve the product task and the gating
task.

Oracle explicit memory: The model has to perform
the product task and the triggered value is given as a
supplementary input by an oracle. Only the capability
to compute the product is tested in such case.

In order to generate an understandable view of how the task
is behaving, we created two extra scenarios for the Figures 2,
5. For both, we have smoothed the inputs by convolving the
random signal by an exponential window of width 10 and
decay 5. For task 1 the inputs are input sequences of 100
time steps whereas for task 2, in order to understand how the
memory was used in the Trained explicit memory architecture,
the inputs are input sequences of 200 time steps. All the
other results are given for random inputs values without any
smoothing.

D. Training data

F. Evaluation procedure

The training data consists of 100 input sequences of 100 time
steps that were randomly sampled in the following way:

•

•

Value is obtained by sampling a uniformly distributed
value between -1 and 1;

Trigger is obtained by sampling a value being either
0 or 1. When the trigger is 1, we call it a trigger event.
In total 5 trigger events occur and they are uniformly
sampled between time step 30 and time step 49.

For all experiments, we used the same training data that was
sampled once when searching for good hyperparameters. For
the principal component analysis, the training data consisted
of 100 input sequences of 10,000 time steps similar to the
previous one. The difference is that there is a constraint on
the delay between two triggers. In Figure 4 there are exactly
200 time steps between triggers whereas in Figure 6 there are
between 100 and 200 time steps between triggers, the delay
between triggers was sampled uniformly.

E. Test data

If not stated differently, the test sequences were generated with
the same guidelines as the training data. They consist of 100
other input sequences of 100 time steps.

For task 1, we tested the trained model on four different test
sets. We ﬁrst tested our model on data with similar statistics
than the training set. We named it the "training-like scenario".
For task 2, for all variants, we tested the trained model on the
same "training-like scenario". Moreover, in order to understand
how the working memory of the model worked in task 1, we
tested it on three other scenarios for which the network was not
trained, in order to test the abilities of the system to generalize
over different statistical inputs. These scenarios can be seen
in Figure 1. They are particularly challenging in the sense
that the model has not been trained with so long inputs. Each
scenario was built using 100 input sequences of 10,000 time
steps generated in the following way:

We took two different evaluation procedures. For both tasks,
while using the training-like scenario we searched for best
hyper-parameters in order to solve the task; we used the
hyperopt Python toolbox [2].

First, for all architectures, in order to be able not only to
ﬁnd better hyper-parameters but to extract information on the
inﬂuence of hyper-parameters on the task we decided to use a
random search for 1000 hyper-parameters, the ﬁrst 200 ones
being chosen purely randomly and the following one using
a Bayesian approach called Tree-structured Parzen Estimator
(TPE)6. In order to evaluate the performance of the ESN, in
this case, we generated 10 instances of the model using the
sampled hyper-parameters. We trained all these ESNs on the
same training data (see subsection II-D).

Secondly, in the three other scenarios on task 1, we picked the
best hyper-parameters found for this task4. This time in order
to evaluate the performance of the ESN on each scenario we
generated 100 instances of the model. Once trained, we tested
all instances on the 3 last scenarios (see subsection II-E). The
following is performed the same way than in the training-like
scenario.

Before feeding a new input sequence to a reservoir we ini-
tialized all its activations to zero. The error we consider at a
given time step is the absolute difference between the produced
output and the desired output. The global performance criterion
we consider is the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE).

III. RESULTS

A. Task 1: Storing a triggered real value

First, we studied the global performance of the model relatively
to the task. Table I reports a good generalization on the

6We sampled from a very large range of values: we sampled log-uniformly
the spectral radius (between 1e-10 and 1e10), the leaking rate (1e-10, 1.0), the
input (resp. feedback) scaling (1e-10, 1e10) and the regularization parameter
(1e-15, 1e-1).

Scenario
Training-like
Single (A)
Periodic (B)
Continuous (C)

RMSE (Mean±Std)
2.28e-4±1.90e-4
4.55e-2±4.19e-2
5.04e-3±4.17e-3
9.25e-5±3.66e-5

TABLE I: Global performances for the four scenarios for
task 1: Mean, standard deviation of the Root Mean Square
Error (RMSE).

Fig. 3: Statistics on the evolution of the error over time
for three testing scenarios (task 1). Median (black line), 5th
percentile (bottom edge of the gray surface) and 95th percentile
(top edge) of the absolute error varying over time. A. Single
update scenario. B. Periodic update scenario. C. Continuous
update scenario. The red vertical lines represent the triggers,
the constant update being shown by a horizontal red dot line.

stable around 1e-4 during the whole run and it even goes
down to 1e-4 during warmup way before it has been trained
to be. The latter might suggest that a smaller warmup could
be used. A very light drift seems also to appear: we created
the scenarios A, B, and C in order to study more extensively
this drift. In the following, we focus on the variation of the
error over time shown in Figure 3. In all cases, after 10,000
time steps, the error is far below 1e-1. Moreover, one can
see that after a trigger event, the error gets around 1e-4, and
in 1,000 steps the error has not even the time to reach 5e-2.
Furthermore, in scenario B, the mean error 10 time steps after
a trigger is 1.51e-04 (±7.87e-04), and for 100 time steps, it is
8.88e-04 (±1.14e-03).

To summarize, we can notice a constant increasing drift of
the output when there is no trigger (A). However, this drift
can be bounded thanks to a periodic trigger that feed a new
value into the reservoir (B), the faster the update the lower the
bound (C). For tasks for which the gated value has to be kept
for a very long amount of time with high precision (and if
one do not want to increase the reservoir size of 100 units), a
simple counting mechanism could provide this periodic trigger.
This could probably be implemented with the same reservoir.

In order to understand how the memorized value is encoded
in the reservoir, we performed a principal component analysis
(PCA) on the reservoir states. Similarly to Pascanu and Jaeger
[24] and Hoerzer et al. [13], this PCA analysis shows that the
dynamic evolves in a low dimensional space where two compo-
nents explain more than 99% of the variance. In fact, even the

Fig. 2: Behavior of the model trained to perform task 1 (gating
task) in a visually understandable case. The model is trained
with the uniform random inputs as values and tested on a
smoothed version of a uniform random signal. Value: values
received by the model, in this example they are obtained by
ﬁltering with an exponential window of width 10 and decay 5
a uniform random sample between -1 and 1. Trigger: triggers
received by the model obtained in the same way than in
the training scenario. Memory: the desired output is in blue
which starts after the warm-up, and the produced output by the
model in dotted red. Error: the absolute difference between
the desired and produced output in log scale. Inputs shown are
different from what the network has been trained on: they are
pseudo-random instead of uniformly random in order to give
a more comprehensible visualization.

training-like scenario with a mean RMSE of 1.63e-4 (±1.14e-
the other
4) and the generalization remains good for all
scenarios. In all cases, the RMSE is equal or smaller than
5e-2. The single update scenario (A) (RMSE about 5e-2) is
harder for our model than the periodic update scenario (B)
(RMSE around 5e-3) which, in turn, is harder for our model
than the continuous update scenario (C) (RMSE around 1e-4).

Then we analyzed how was evolving the error over time. In
Figure 2 we show an example of the evolution of the output.
We can note two properties on this ﬁgure: the error remains

0204060801001.00.50.00.51.0Value0204060801001.00.50.00.51.0Trigger0204060801000.40.20.00.20.4Memory020406080100106104102Error0200040006000800010000106104102100ErrorA0200040006000800010000106104102100ErrorB0200040006000800010000Time106104102100ErrorCFig. 4: Task 1, Memory only architecture. Left Evolution of the value memorized in the working memory unit along the two
principal components that explain more than 99% of the variance of the internal activities. First PC is correlated with time: we
can see the sequence of the memorized values. Right Evolution of the value memorized in the working memory unit along the
principal components that are the most correlated with the memorized value.

ﬁrst component alone explains more than 89% of the variance.
However, the ﬁrst two components do not seem directly related
to the stored value in the WM unit. Figure 4 (Left) shows
the evolution of the reservoir for a speciﬁc input sequence. In
this ﬁgure, we can see that the ﬁrst component is correlated
with the evolution of time as it keeps increasing with time, the
correlation with time is actually near 1. The second component
doesn’t contain directly the memorized value but it’s discrete
derivative7 does: the correlation between its discrete derivative
and the memorized value is near 1. Combining the two, we
can see that on the ﬁrst two components the dynamic evolves
piece-wise linearly and the memorized value is actually the
slope of the lines. In order to ﬁnd components that could
explain better how is stored the memorized value, we also
watched at the components that were the most correlated with
the memorized value. Not so surprisingly that was not at all the
one of before as the memorized value is not linearly encoded
in any of them. These components explain not much about the
variance but, as we can see in Figure 4 (Right), the same kind
of phenomena appears. When a given value is stored, these
components evolve on a line, but now that’s not the slope that
contains the memorized value all the slope are similar, that’s
the offset of the line. Moreover, we can note that in these
components the values stored in memory are better distributed
in the space. When a new value is stored these components
jumps in another place. One can notice a linear color gradient
along the axis perpendicular to the lines. So, similarly than
in [20] for neural recording, the components that explain the
best the variance might not be the best ones to explain how
the memorized value is encoded.

B. Using a working memory unit to solve a complex task

Given the results from task 1, we know that we have a unit able
to store a real value. In the following, we studied how such
ability can help to perform another task: output the product
between the current input and a previous input indicated by a
trigger.

First, we tried to answer 3 questions and the results we used
to provide answers are summarized in Table II:

•

•

•

Does the presence of an explicit memory help? The
mean RMSE obtained without explicit memory is at
least 3 order of magnitude above the ones using a
working memory unit. Moreover, the mean RMSE in
the latter case is at 7.26e-4 ±1.88e-4, so the task is
actually performed quite well. Thus, having a working
memory unit greatly helps.

How does the training between memory and product
interfere ? To answer this question, we replaced the
WM unit with an Oracle. The difference between the
architecture with the WM unit compared with the
Oracle is lower than one order of magnitude: 7.26e-
4 ±1.88e-4 against 1.99e-4 ±3.15e-5 for the Oracle.
Therefore, the fact of training the working memory at
the same time as the product output does not seem to
interfere much with the performance obtained on the
product.

Is the feedback helping when there is no WM unit?
In the two cases studied, the fact of having or not a
feedback did not change qualitatively the results.

Afterward, we studied the behavior of the model. Here, we
focus on the "Trained explicit memory" architecture: with

7We call discrete derivative of a value that evolves in a discrete time, the
evolution of the difference between the value at a time and at the previous
time.

Task

Architecture

RMSE

Memory
only

No
explicit
memory

No
explicit
memory
(No FB)

Trained
explicit
memory

Oracle
explicit
memory

Oracle
explicit
memory
(No FB)

1.55e-4
±7.42e-5

3.03e-1
±4.53e-4

3.05e-1
±3.67e-4

7.26e-4
±1.88e-4

1.99e-4
±3.15e-5

7.10e-5
±2.65e-5

TABLE II: Summary of the performance for the best hyper-
parameters found by Bayesian optimization. The number of
neurons was ﬁxed to 100.

Fig. 5: Illustration of the behavior of the model trained to
perform the product task in a more understandable case. Value:
values received by the model. Trigger: triggers received by the
model. Memory: two curves superposed, the desired (working)
memory output in blue which starts after the warm-up, and in
dotted red the memory output obtained. Product: two curves
superposed, in blue the desired product output (i.e. the product
of the desired memory and the value received), and in dotted
red the product output obtained. Product by memory: two
curves superposed, in blue the desired product output if it had
to be consistent with the memory stored (i.e. the product of
the actual memory and the value received) and in red dotted
the product output obtained. Error: the absolute difference
between the desired and produced output (in log scale for
Memory). Each plot corresponds to the error of the plot just
above. The desired output and the error are shown after the
warm-up that has been used during training. The vertical red
dot line is here to represent the time step after which the model
has not been trained to perform the task. (Inputs shown are
different from what the network has been trained on.)

VTMﬁxedplasticValueTriggerWorkingMemoryVTOﬁxedplasticValueTriggerOutputVTOﬁxedplasticValueTriggerOutputVTOMﬁxedplasticValueTriggerWorkingMemoryOutputVTOMﬁxedplasticValueTriggerWorkingMemoryOutputVTOMﬁxedplasticValueTriggerWorkingMemoryOutput0255075100125150175200101Value0255075100125150175200101Trigger02550751001251501752000.250.000.25Memory0255075100125150175200106104102Error02550751001251501752000.20.00.2Product02550751001251501752000.000.010.02Error02550751001251501752000.20.00.2Productby memory02550751001251501752000.000.010.02ErrorFig. 6: Task 2, Trained explicit memory architecture Left Evolution of the value memorized in the working memory unit along
the ﬁrst and the third principal components (PC). The ﬁrst PC is correlated with time: we can see the sequence of the memorized
values. Right Evolution of the value memorized in the working memory unit along the PCs of the internal activities that are the
most correlated with the memorized value. In order to better see the temporal evolution, the dots at a time step is connected to
the one at the previous time step, except in the case where the model receives a trigger (in order to avoid meaningless artifacts).

feedback from both the output and the working memory unit.
In Figure 5, we show how the model behaves with simpliﬁed
ﬁltered random input values. On the ﬁrst 100 time steps, the
model can keep a working memory unit stable as it has been
trained to and perform the product with a very small error.
By comparing the error in the curves below the "Product" and
"Product by memory" curves, we can see that the value used
to perform the product is the actual stored value and not the
theoretical value (that should have been stored). The model
seems to use the working memory unit as we would expect it
to do. This is similar to what [13] have shown, but with real
values instead of binary values (or switches).

Finally, we studied the evolution of the internal activities of
our model: as before, to reduce the dimensionality a principal
component analysis (PCA) has been performed on the reservoir
states. Again as in [13], the two ﬁrst principal components
contain a lot of information: here they can explain 99.8% of
the variance of the activations. However, in this case, the ﬁrst
component already explains more than 96% of the variance
(compared to 89% for task 1), and thus explains even more
variability than earlier. As before, the ﬁrst component is linked
to time, but here the correlation is non-linear. However, the
link between the memorized value and the second component
is less clear than before. As shown in Figure 6 (Left), with
the third component we can see something similar (even if
noisier) to the second component of the previous PCA analysis
(Figure 4, Left). On the ﬁrst and third components, the activity
nearly evolves as lines and the slope of this line depends on
the value stored: when the memorized value is negative (red,
orange) it decreases, when it is positive it increases (green,
blue). In this case, we also watched the two components that
were the most correlated with the memorized value. As before,
the activity seems to evolve noisily on parallel lines depending
on the value stored, the blue (resp. red) lines, corresponding
to positive (resp. negative) memorized values.

IV. DISCUSSION

We have shown how a small group of randomly connected
units is able to maintain an arbitrary value at an arbitrary
time from a streamed input. It is to be noted that the model
has not been trained at memorizing (by heart) every possible
value since there is virtually an inﬁnite number of values
between -1 and +1. What the model has actually learned is
to gate an input value into a placeholder, a.k.a. a working
memory unit. This property of the model can be considered
as a gated memory: a value enters the memory at the moment
of the (input) trigger and is kept constant in face of incoming
distractors (the continuous streamed input). Such robustness is
actually characteristic of a gated working memory: information
enters while the gate is opened and is kept constant once
the gate is closed. In that regard,
is to be noted that
previous works have addressed the question but in different
ways. Lim and Goldman [17] have shown that a balanced
cortical microcircuitry can give account of the maintenance
of information. The model uses a corrective negative feedback
that makes it robust against common perturbation but requires
a balanced amount of excitation and inhibition. Similarly,
Stern et al. [27] explains how random neural networks can
exhibit a bi-stable behavior using strong local connectivity and
random inter-unit connections. In another kind of recent work
Jaeger [16] use conceptors to project and drive the dynamics
in a sub-space of lower dimension.

it

We have also demonstrated how such explicit working memory
is critical in solving a multiplication task. Probably the most
interesting point in this task is the following: the same model
deprived of the explicit working memory fails at solving the
task and exhibits very bad performances (error of 3.03e-1
instead of 7.26e-4). This demonstrates the criticality of the
presence of the working memory unit. Interestingly,
these
results are coherent with the Dambre et al. [4] trade-off

hypothesis: the “No explicit memory” model performs worse
than the models with WM units because its dynamics are not
able to perform the non-linear computations and the long-term
memorization at the same time.

In this study, we did not try to ﬁnd the optimal number of
reservoir units needed for each task. Conversely, we voluntary
limited the size of the reservoir to 100 neurons in order to see
if such rather small reservoirs were sufﬁciently competitive.
Moreover, even though we have optimized the hyperparameters
of the model in order to ﬁnd the best performances, the random
nature of the network suggests that such working memory
property is an intrinsic property of any (recurrent) group of
neurons under some conditions (size, spectral radius,
leak
rate)8. Furthermore, even though it was not the main goal here,
this study is a ﬁrst step in exploring the plausibility of having
a network of such small gated reservoirs being interconnected
together, similarly as LSTM cells in an LSTM network.

REFERENCES

[1] A Bechara, H Damasio, D Tranel, and S W Anderson.
Dissociation of working memory from decision making
within the human prefrontal cortex. Journal of neuro-
science, 18(1):428–437, 1998.

[2] J Bergstra, D Yamins, and D D Cox. Hyperopt: A python
library for optimizing the hyperparameters of machine
learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the 12th Python
in Science Conference, pages 13–20. Citeseer, 2013.

[3] D V Buonomano and M M Merzenich.

Temporal
information transformed into a spatial code by a neural
network with realistic properties. Science, 267(5200):
1028–1030, 1995.

[4] J Dambre, D Verstraeten, B Schrauwen, and S Massar.
Information processing capacity of dynamical systems.
Scientiﬁc reports, 2:514, 2012.

[5] P F Dominey. Complex sensory-motor sequence learning
based on recurrent state representation and reinforcement
learning. Biological cybernetics, 73(3):265–274, 1995.
[6] P Enel, E Procyk, R Quilodran, and P F Dominey.
Reservoir computing properties of neural dynamics in
prefrontal cortex. PLoS computational biology, 12(6):
e1004967, 2016.

[7] J M Fuster. The prefrontal cortex — an update: time is

of the essence. Neuron, 30(2):319–333, 2001.

[8] F A Gers, J Schmidhuber, and F Cummins. Learning
to forget: Continual prediction with LSTM. Neural
computation, 12(10):2451–2471, 2000.

[9] P S Goldman-Rakic. Circuitry of primate prefrontal
cortex and regulation of behavior by representational
memory. Comprehensive Physiology, 1987.

[10] X Hinaut and P F Dominey. Real-time parallel processing
of grammatical structure in the fronto-striatal system:
A recurrent network simulation study using reservoir
computing. PloS one, 8(2):e52946, 2013.

[11] X Hinaut, F Lance, C Droin, M Petit, G Pointeau, and P F
Dominey. Corticostriatal response selection in sentence
production: Insights from neural network simulation with
reservoir computing. Brain and language, 150:54–68,
2015.

8We choose some particular hyperparameters among many good enough

ones: each parameter seems robust in a quite substantial range of values.

[12] S Hochreiter and J Schmidhuber. Long short-term mem-
ory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
[13] G M Hoerzer, R Legenstein, and W Maass. Emergence
of complex computational structures from chaotic neural
networks through reward-modulated hebbian learning.
Cerebral cortex, 24(3):677–690, 2012.

[14] H Jaeger. The “echo state” approach to analysing and
Bonn, Germany:

training recurrent neural networks.
GMD Technical Report, 148(34), 2001.

[15] H Jaeger. Long short-term memory in echo state net-
works: Details of a simulation study. Technical report,
Jacobs University Bremen, 2012.

[16] H Jaeger. Controlling recurrent neural networks by
conceptors. arXiv preprint arXiv:1403.3369, 2014.
[17] S Lim and M S Goldman. Balanced cortical microcir-
cuitry for maintaining information in working memory.
Nature Neuroscience, 16(9):1306–1314, aug 2013.
[18] M Lukoševiˇcius. A practical guide to applying echo state
networks. In Neural networks: Tricks of the trade, pages
659–686. Springer, 2012.

[19] W Maass, T Natschläger, and H Markram. Real-time
computing without stable states: A new framework for
neural computation based on perturbations. Neural com-
putation, 14(11):2531–2560, 2002.

[20] C K Machens, R Romo, and C D Brody. Functional,
but not anatomical, separation of “what” and “when” in
prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 30(1):350–
360, 2010.

[21] F Mannella and G Baldassarre. Selection of cortical
dynamics for motor behaviour by the basal ganglia.
Biological cybernetics, 109(6):575–595, 2015.

[22] J Martens and I Sutskever. Learning recurrent neural
In ICML-11

networks with hessian-free optimization.
Proceedings, pages 1033–1040. Citeseer, 2011.

[23] E K Miller and J D Cohen. An integrative theory of pre-
frontal cortex function. Annual review of neuroscience,
24(1):167–202, 2001.

[24] R Pascanu and H Jaeger. A neurodynamical model for
working memory. Neural networks, 24(2):199–207, 2011.
[25] M Rigotti, O Barak, M R Warden, X-J Wang, N D
Daw, E K Miller, and S Fusi. The importance of mixed
selectivity in complex cognitive tasks. Nature, 497(7451):
585, 2013.

[26] R Romo, C D Brody, A Hernández, and L Lemus.
Neuronal correlates of parametric working memory in
the prefrontal cortex. Nature, 399(6735):470, 1999.
[27] M Stern, H Sompolinsky, and L F Abbott. Dynamics
of random neural networks with bistable units. Physical
Review E, 90(6), dec 2014.

[28] D Sussillo. Neural circuits as computational dynamical
systems. Current opinion in neurobiology, 25:156–163,
2014.

[29] D Sussillo and O Barak. Opening the black box:
low-dimensional dynamics in high-dimensional recurrent
neural networks. 25(3):626–649, 2013.

[30] P J Werbos. Backpropagation through time: what it does
and how to do it. Proceedings of the IEEE, 78(10):1550–
1560, 1990.

