Towards a Computational Cognitive Neuroscience
Model of Creativity
Hugo Chateau-Laurent, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Hugo Chateau-Laurent, Frédéric Alexandre. Towards a Computational Cognitive Neuroscience Model
of Creativity. IEEE ICCI\*CC’21 - 20th IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics and
Cognitive Computing, Oct 2021, Banff, Canada. ￿hal-03359407￿

HAL Id: hal-03359407

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03359407

Submitted on 30 Sep 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Towards a Computational Cognitive Neuroscience
Model of Creativity

Hugo Chateau-Laurent
Mnemosyne, Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest
LaBRI, CNRS, Universit´e de Bordeaux
Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives
CNRS, Universit´e de Bordeaux, France
hugo.chateau-laurent@inria.fr

Fr´ed´eric Alexandre
Mnemosyne, Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest
LaBRI, CNRS, Universit´e de Bordeaux
Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives
CNRS, Universit´e de Bordeaux, France
frederic.alexandre@inria.fr

Abstract—Recent progress in AI has expanded the boundaries
of the cognitive functions that can be simulated, but creativity
remains a challenge. Neuroscience sheds light on its mechanisms
and its tight relationship with episodic memory and cognitive
control, while machine learning provides preliminary models
of these mechanisms. We present these lines of research and
explain how they can be exploited in the domain of computational
creativity in order to further expand the capabilities of AI.

Index Terms—creativity, explicit memory, episodic memory,
imagination, computa-

prospective memory, cognitive control,
tional cognitive neuroscience, artiﬁcial intelligence

I. INTRODUCTION

Creativity is a fundamental feature of human information
processing but a historically challenging task for a machine. It
is generally agreed that it includes two deﬁning characteristics,
namely coming up with a novel
idea and verifying that
this idea is appropriate for the task at play [1]. They are
respectively termed divergent and convergent thinking [2].

Despite tremendous progress made with machine learning,
artiﬁcial intelligence models suffer from a series of weaknesses
including but not limited to overﬁtting and poor transferability
[3]. Thinking through analogy and imagination would be
key ingredients for solving these problems. Unfortunately,
such creative functions seem to remain a challenge for the
machine. Yet, it is declared in [4] that “creativity isn’t magical.
It’s an aspect of normal human intelligence”. In accordance
with M. Boden, we argue that creativity results from the
functioning of the human brain and should consequently be
better understood by studying its physical substrate. As a
consequence, we propose to relate computational creativity
(CC) to computational cognitive neuroscience (CCN). It has
already been suggested in [5] that current modeling work in
CCN carried out to remedy current limitations of artiﬁcial
intelligence could be directly beneﬁcial to CC by unravelling
the brain mechanisms responsible for divergent and convergent
thinking. Here we propose to extend this view by providing
more details on recent experiments in neuroscience and recent
modeling efforts in that direction. In that perspective, we
brieﬂy sketch the mnemonic architecture of the human brain,
going in more details on mechanisms reported to be involved
in imagination and cognitive control, participating in creativity.

Then we report recent modeling efforts to implement these
mechanisms and discuss how they might be adapted to CC.

II. THE HUMAN MNEMONIC ARCHITECTURE

A. Implicit memory

In cognitive neuroscience, a major distinction is made
between implicit and explicit memory, also called non-
declarative and declarative memory respectively [6]. The for-
mer corresponds to the slow learning of regularities present in
the world. This learning is well captured in current machine
learning models, as they rely on statistical methods. This
is for example the case with the layered architecture of
deep networks [7] that has demonstrated high performance
in pattern identiﬁcation and is sometimes compared to the
architecture of the sensory cortex. It is also the case with the
most classical approaches of reinforcement learning, the actor-
critic architectures [8], which are today among the best models
for action selection and decision making. These approaches are
paralleled with the loops between the basal ganglia and the
most ancient parts of the frontal cortex, namely the motor and
premotor cortex (standing for the actor) and the orbitofrontal
cortex (standing for the critic). These models perform implicit
learning because they simply learn from a statistical analysis
of trials and errors, regularities in labelled patterns, rewarding
value of states or sensorimotor associations, with no explicit
knowledge of the world structure [3]. After learning, these
values cached in weights are exploited implicitly to respond
to new cases. As it can be seen with the recent success
of machine learning, these approaches are very successful
they suffer
when large training corpora are available, but
from several weaknesses, precisely because their learning is
implicit. Two sets of weaknesses have been studied in the
context of two different mechanisms that might remedy them,
both corresponding to building an explicit memory: episodic
learning and cognitive control.

B. Explicit memory: episodic learning

A ﬁrst set of weaknesses is observed in deep networks,
where learning takes place in a layered architecture with
distributed, integrated and overlapping representations. This is
the reason why these models can generalize, at the price of a

very slow learning. Conversely, they are not good for learning
data without structure nor regularities. They learn slowly, from
global aspects to details, and they forget the individual cases
they have received. They are also sensitive to catastrophic
forgetting: if they ﬁrst learn to identify a certain pattern and
then learn to identify another one, they will forget the ﬁrst
kind of identiﬁcation if they don’t have a regular recall of the
previously learnt association, thus adding to the slowness of
learning.

temporal

It is explained in [9] how the hippocampus which imple-
ments episodic learning could complement the cortex in order
for the mammalian brain to remedy that kind of weaknesses.
This cerebral structure in the medial
lobe binds
information from most regions of the cortex and is able to learn
the current cortical activation in one shot. Due to mechanisms
of sustained activity in the cortex evoked below, this activation
stands for the current episode processed by the cortex, hence
the term episodic learning. This memory is explicit because,
in contrast to the cortex that evokes relations acquired from
many episodes, this learning manipulates individual episodes
explicitly. This is associated with speciﬁc characteristics of
hippocampal information processing: an elaborated function
of pattern separation based on sparse coding [10] to minimize
interference when learning a new episode and a mechanism
of recall enabling the hippocampus to rebuild an originally
stored pattern from a partial cue thanks to its unique recurrent
architecture. Recall is associated with a mechanism called
replay [11] to reactivate a stored episode in the cortex. This
process helps solving the problem of catastrophic interference
because, when you are learning a new ability in the cortex,
it has been shown that during sleep, the hippocampus replays
other kinds of examples to balance learning [11]; and what
is replayed here are explicit and unique episodes and not a
statistical implicit model. This illustrates an interesting duality
in our memories between knowledge (I know that) and skill
(I know how).

C. Explicit memory: cognitive control

Let us now introduce another set of weaknesses associated
with implicit learning. Reinforcement learning models are very
powerful in stable worlds and can assign a value to states
and actions and guide behavior accordingly, with no explicit
knowledge of the rules of the world. This is no longer the
case if the behavior to be learnt
is context-dependent, or
in other words when the rules change depending on certain
perceptual cues or on internal information (instructions given
or simply emotions or motivations). An implicit model could
unlearn the old behavior and learn the new one but this would
come at a cost of time. This is not compatible with the
ﬂexibility of human behaviour that can exhibit rapid changes
from one situation to an other. In addition, we can see that
this kind of change is explicit and deliberative. In this case,
the solution would be to not only rely on the default behavior
proposed by the implicit model from external information but
to explicitly identify the context, inhibit the default behavior
and instead promote the appropriate one which has been stored

from previous learning. This is what we call cognitive control:
whereas simple decision making relies on perception to control
actions and promote a certain behavior, cognitive control relies
on external and internal contextual cues to control behavior in
a top-down way.

It has long been known in neuroscience that the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) is the structure responsible for this function
[12]. This structure, particularly developed in humans (30%
of the total surface of the cortex), is characterized by its
ability to show a long-lasting sustained activity, also called
working memory. In certain circumstances, it is able to inhibit
a maladapted default behavior and promote a more appropriate
one for an extended period of time. This is done by biasing
the activity of the cortex,
i.e. by artiﬁcially imposing an
increased activity to some sensory regions of the cortex
through an attentional process [13]. In this way, a non-
dominant behavior can become eligible and active. When rule
changes, the working memory can be updated to promote
another behavior. Deciding if the rules have changed (from
the monitoring of errors measured between the anticipated
and observed outcomes) and learning what contextual cues to
maintain in working memory are the roles of the medial and
lateral PFC respectively [14]. In these regions, the neuronal
populations are organized according to the nature of the task
[15]. It has been shown that they are organized along several
dimensions on the cortical surface [16]. From rostral to more
caudal portions, more and more abstract rules can be observed.
There is also a dorsal-ventral axis, with rules predominantly
concerned with the semantic meaning of the task on the ventral
side and rules controlling the syntactic organization of the
task on the dorsal side. When errors indicate that the rule
has changed, it is possible to immediately test other rules
which have been proven efﬁcient for this task, else to look
for rules applied in similar (i.e. sharing characteristics) tasks.
Another proposed strategy is to build new rules by mixing old
ones [17]. As discussed below, these are key mechanisms for
creativity.

III. DELIBERATING IN THE FUTURE

A. Prospective memory

We have explained that the hippocampus is able to bind
distributed activities of the cortex to explicitly create a memory
of a speciﬁc episode and that the PFC is able to bias the
activity of the cortex to inhibit the default implicit behavior
and explicitly promote a behavior more appropriate in the
current context [18]. What is fundamental to understand here
is that the hippocampus also receives pieces of information
from the PFC and binds them within episodes which are also
sent back to the PFC thus participating to its training and acti-
vation. Reciprocally, the PFC receives contextual information
elaborated in the hippocampus and can bias the activity of the
hippocampus in order to control both the storage and retrieval
of episodes [19]. Furthermore, it is now widely accepted that
memory is a (re)constructive process, and that nearly the same
circuitry is used for not only remembering (or reconstructing)
the past, but also imagining the future [20]. In summary,

the hippocampus and the PFC both form a generative model
by learning an explicit model of the world. By sampling
from various episodes and anticipating the consequences of
one’s actions, they are able to internally simulate and evaluate
candidate strategies. This is what we call imagination and what
is realized in the process of thinking [21].

B. What about creativity ?

Neuroscientiﬁc studies about creativity are in accordance
with the general picture given here and provide additional
details. [22] report an interesting fMRI experiment demon-
strating the role of the medial PFC and hippocampus in
reorganizing memory when new information is presented. In
the experiment, a series of narrative videos is shown, including
clues linking some of them and stimulating insight in partic-
ipants (i.e. the sudden discovery of a solution to a problem).
It is observed that these moments are associated with the
emergence of new mnemonic representations while irrelevant
events are pruned out. The paper reports individual events
activating the hippocampus and mismatch response in the
anterior hippocampus being sent to the medial PFC. [23] report
the role of the medial PFC in inhibiting automatic common
ideas through its dorsal part and allowing for ﬂexibility and
original ideas generation through its ventral part. The medial
PFC can detect the co-existence of several solutions including
non-dominant solutions and can switch attention to favor one
of them [24], with the level of originality in creativity rather
linked to broadened and not focused attention [25]. Concerning
divergent thinking, insight is deﬁned as the reinterpretation
of a situation to produce non-dominant interpretation [24]
and characterized by the activation of the medial PFC (for
conﬂict monitoring) and of the medial temporal lobe including
the hippocampus (associated with semantic integration before
insight). In that paper, the role of mood is also underlined,
associated with the broadening of semantic processing. This
might correspond to the difference between spontaneous cre-
ativity monitored by such bottom-up information, opposed to
deliberate creativity monitored in a top-down way by the PFC
[1]. Concerning convergent thinking, verifying the semantic
and syntactic pertinence of a newly proposed behavior is part
of the top-down control of the PFC observed during creativity,
shown to activate the ventral and dorsal regions respectively
[2]. Interestingly, in prospective memory, this veriﬁcation can
be done internally using the learnt generative models, with no
need for real action.

IV. COMPUTATIONAL ASPECTS

A. Models of explicit memory

principle of conceptors [27] has also been introduced as an
attentional process by restricting processing to a sub-region
of the data space. Beyond these computational principles,
other models have a deeper biological grounding. Let us
ﬁrst mention a model of the hippocampus able to store and
recall episodes [28], with the emphasis set on interactions
between various inner mechanisms. Particularly, in addition
to the learning of speciﬁc episodes, this model is also able
to discover statistical regularities in the episodes, which is
shown to be a potential substrate for transitive inference (i.e.
the discovery that if A is associated to B and B is associated
to C, then A is associated to C), an important ingredient
of creativity. Other computational studies have extended the
traditional reinforcement
learning paradigm to account for
hippocampal sequence generation. For example, a recently
proposed model provides an explanation as to why and how
the hippocampus is capable of not only replaying experienced
sequences of states, but “imagining” unexperienced ones as
well [29]. Concerning cognitive control, [14] implements a
neuronal model based on the principles of predictive coding.
Errors detected between the anticipated and actual outcomes
are mapped and associated with their context to subsequently
trigger a more adapted behavior when the same context is
detected.

B. What about computational creativity ?

To our knowledge, there are presently very few CCN models
dealing explicitly with creativity, with the notable exceptions
of [17] and [30]. The former model mainly focuses on the
action of the medial PFC in creativity. It proposes a biologi-
cally informed computational account of how we can ﬂexibly
switch from one set of rules to another and explains that
we might create a new set of rules from combining existing
ones. In this model using simple symbolic tasks, the role of
the hippocampus is not considered, which leaves considerable
room for improvement. In the latter study, a computational
account of creativity emphasizing the importance of binding
information from multiple sources is given. In our opinion,
what is currently lacking is a computational model of the
interactions between the hippocampus (arbitrary binding and
episodic learning) and the PFC (control of encoding, recall
and imagination) dedicated to creativity. Beyond implementing
controlled episodic memory, we believe that such a model
would shed light on the ability of the “construction system
of the brain” [31] to creatively think about novel situations
and verifying their task relevance (Fig. 1).

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Whereas recent achievements in machine learning are
mainly related to models of implicit memory, more atten-
tion has recently been given to models of explicit memory
in order to provide more realistic and ﬂexible models. In
reinforcement learning, this is for example the case of episodic
and meta reinforcement learning [26], introduced to accelerate
deep reinforcement learning with the same kind of arguments
as provided above. In the case of supervised learning, the

In this paper, we attempted to lay down the foundations
for a CCN approach to creativity based on the combination
of cognitive control and episodic learning. We have explained
that several models already propose mechanisms participating
to creative processes in the brain but several characteristics
need to be studied in more depth. For example, the role of
hemispheric differences is often mentioned in neuroscientiﬁc
experiments about creativity [24] whereas this concept of

[8] D. Joel, Y. Niv, and E. Ruppin, “Actor–critic models of the basal
ganglia: new anatomical and computational perspectives,” Neural
Networks, vol. 15, no. 4-6, pp. 535–547, Jul. 2002. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0893-6080(02)00047-3

[9] J. L. McClelland, B. L. McNaughton, and R. C. O’Reilly, “Why
in the hippocampus
there are complementary learning systems
and
of
insights
connectionist models of learning and memory.” Psychological review,
vol. 102, no. 3, pp. 419–457,
[Online]. Available:
http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7624455

Jul. 1995.

neocortex:

from the

successes

failures

and

[10] R. Kassab and F. Alexandre, “Pattern separation in the hippocampus:
distinct circuits under different conditions,” Brain Structure & Function,
vol. 223, no. 6, pp. 2785–2808, 2018.

[11] I. Stoianov, D. Maisto, and G. Pezzulo, “The hippocampal formation as a
hierarchical generative model supporting generative replay and continual
learning,” bioRxiv, p. 2020.01.16.908889, Jan. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.01.16.908889v1

[12] J. Fuster, The prefontal cortex. Anatomy, physiology and neurophysiol-

ogy of the frontal lobe. Raven Press, New-York, 1989.
[13] R. C. O’Reilly, D. C. Noelle, T. S. Braver,
cortex

J. D.
tasks:
Cohen,
representational organization and neuromodulatory control.” Cereb
Cortex, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 246–257, Mar. 2002. [Online]. Available:
http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11839599

and
categorization

“Prefrontal

dynamic

and

[14] W. H. Alexander and J. W. Brown, “Hierarchical error representation:
a computational model of anterior cingulate and dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex,” Neural Computation, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 2354–2410, 2015.

[15] P. Domenech and E. Koechlin, “Executive control and decision-
making in the prefrontal cortex,” Current Opinion in Behavioral
Sciences, vol. 1, pp. 101–106, Feb. 2015.
[Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2014.10.007

[16] R. C. O’Reilly, “The What and How of prefrontal cortical organization,”
Trends in Neurosciences, vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 355–361, Aug. 2010.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2010.05.002

[17] A. Collins and E. Koechlin, “Reasoning, Learning, and Creativity:
Frontal Lobe Function and Human Decision-Making,” PLOS Biology,
[Online]. Available:
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. e1 001 293+, Mar. 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001293

[18] J. D. Cohen and R. C. O’Reilly, “A Preliminary Theory of the Inter-
actions Between Prefrontal Cortex and Hippocampus that Contribute
to Planning and Prospective Memory,” in Prospective Memory: Theory
and Applications, M. Brandimonte, G. O. Einstein, and M. A. McDaniel,
Eds. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996, pp.
267–296.

[19] H. Eichenbaum, “Prefrontal–hippocampal interactions in episodic mem-
ory,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 547–558, 2017.
[20] D. L. Schacter, D. R. Addis, and R. L. Buckner, “Remembering the
the prospective brain,” Nature Reviews
[Online].

past
Neuroscience, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 657–661, Sep. 2007.
Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/nrn2213

to imagine the future:

[21] G. Pezzulo and C. Castelfranchi, “Thinking as

the control of
imagination: a conceptual
framework for goal-directed systems,”
Psychological Research PRPF, vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 559–577, 2009.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00426-009-0237-z
[22] B. Milivojevic, A. Vicente-Grabovetsky, and C. Doeller, “Insight
Reconﬁgures Hippocampal-Prefrontal Memories,” Current Biology,
vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 821–830, Mar. 2015.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982215000652

[23] N. Mayseless, A. Eran, and S. G. Shamay-Tsoory, “Generating original
ideas: The neural underpinning of originality,” NeuroImage, vol. 116,
pp. 232–239, Aug. 2015.

[24] J. Kounios and M. Beeman, “The cognitive neuroscience of insight,”

Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 65, pp. 71–93, 2014.

[25] H. Takeuchi, Y. Taki, R. Nouchi, R. Yokoyama, Y. Kotozaki,
Iizuka, S. Hanawa, T. Araki,
S. Nakagawa, A. Sekiguchi, K.
Ikeda,
C. M. Miyauchi, K. Sakaki, Y. Sassa, T. Nozawa, S.
S. Yokota, D. Magistro,
“Originality of
divergent thinking is associated with working memory–related brain
study,” NeuroImage,
activity: Evidence
large
vol.
[Online]. Available:
116825, Aug.
216,
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1053811920303128

and R. Kawashima,

sample
2020.

from a

p.

[26] M. Botvinick,

S. Ritter,
and D. Hassabis,

J. X. Wang,

“Reinforcement
Sciences,

Z. Kurth-Nelson,
Learning,
23,
vol.

and

Slow,”

Trends

in Cognitive

Blundell,

C.
Fast

Fig. 1. The proposed framework combines cognitive control and episodic
learning for solving ﬂexible episodic memory and creative planning.

lateralization is mostly absent in models. We believe that an
accurate model of how creativity is implemented in the brain
would explain experimental ﬁndings, such as the deactivation
of the lateral PFC and activation of the medial PFC that
have been observed during music improvisation [2]. We can
hypothesize that the medial PFC is responsible for tracking
errors in the improvisation, while the constrained control of
behavior implemented by the lateral PFC is being inhibited.
We also believe that better understanding the computational
mechanisms associated to creativity would greatly augment
machine intelligence considering their role in imagination,
planning, decision-making, navigation, and arguably all other
cognitive abilities. The development of a detailed computa-
tional framework will likely lead to the demystiﬁcation of
creativity as a unique human capability. Even more striking
is the possibility that creativity might be reduced to certain
aspects of control, memory and decision making.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Dietrich, “The cognitive neuroscience of creativity,” Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1011–1026, Dec. 2004. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196731

[2] R. E. Jung, B. S. Mead, J. Carrasco, and R. A. Flores, “The
structure of creative cognition in the human brain,” Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience,
[Online]. Available:
vol.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00330/full
[3] G. Marcus, “Deep learning: A critical appraisal,” arXiv preprint

2013.

7,

arXiv:1801.00631, 2018.

[4] M. A. Boden, “Computer Models of Creativity,” AI Magazine,
vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 23–23, Jul. 2009, number: 3. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aaai.org/ojs/index.php/aimagazine/article/view/2254

“Creativity explained by computational
of
in Proceedings

cognitive
[5] F. Alexandre,
International
neuroscience,”
Conference on Computational Creativity,
ICCC 2020, Coimbra,
Portugal, September 7-11, 2020, F. A. Cardoso, P. Machado,
T. Veale, and J. M. Cunha, Eds. Association for Computational
Creativity
[Online]. Available:
http://computationalcreativity.net/iccc20/papers/119-iccc20.pdf

the Eleventh

374–377.

(ACC),

2020,

pp.

[6] L. R. Squire, “Declarative and nondeclarative memory: multiple
brain systems supporting learning and memory.” Journal of cognitive
neuroscience, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 232–243, 1992. [Online]. Available:
http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23964880

[7] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature,
vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, May 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14539

5,

no.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661319300610

408–422, May

[Online].

2019.

Available:

pp.

[27] X. He

and H.

Interference
using Conceptor-Aided Backpropagation,” ICLR, Feb. 2018. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1al7jg0b

“Overcoming Catastrophic

Jaeger,

[28] A. C. Schapiro, N. B. Turk-Browne, M. M. Botvinick, and K. A.
Norman, “Complementary learning systems within the hippocampus:
a neural network modelling approach to reconciling episodic memory
the Royal
with statistical
Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 372, no. 1711, Jan. 2017. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5124075/

learning,” Philosophical Transactions of

[29] M. Khamassi

and B. Girard,

reactivations with model-based bidirectional
Cybernetics, vol. 114, no. 2, pp. 231–248, Apr. 2020.
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00422-020-00817-x

“Modeling awake hippocampal
search,” Biological
[Online].

[30] P. Thagard and T. C. Stewart, “The aha! experience: Creativity through
emergent binding in neural networks,” Cognitive science, vol. 35, no. 1,
pp. 1–33, 2011.

[31] D. Hassabis and E. A. Maguire, “The construction system of the brain,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
vol. 364, no. 1521, pp. 1263–1271, 2009.

