A System-Level Model of Noradrenergic Function
Maxime Carrere, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Maxime Carrere, Frédéric Alexandre. A System-Level Model of Noradrenergic Function. 25th Inter-
national Conference on Artificial Neural Networks (ICANN), Sep 2016, Barcelona, Spain. pp.214 -
221, ￿10.1007/978-3-319-44778-0\_25￿. ￿hal-01401890￿

HAL Id: hal-01401890

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01401890

Submitted on 23 Nov 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

A System-level Model of Noradrenergic function

Maxime Carrere1,2,3 and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre2,1,3

1LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, Talence, France
2Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200 Avenue de la Vieille Tour, 33405 Talence, France
3IMN, Universit´e de Bordeaux, CNRS, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France
frederic.alexandre@inria.fr

Abstract. Neuromodulation is an interesting way to display diﬀerent
modes of functioning in a complex network. The eﬀect of Noradrenaline
has often been related to the exploration/exploitation trade-oﬀ and im-
plemented in models by modulation of the gain of activation function. In
this paper, we show that this mechanism is not suﬃcient for system-level
networks and propose another way to implement it, exploiting reported
inhibition of a striatal region by Noradrenaline. We describe here the
corresponding model and report its performances in a reversal task.

Keywords: Neuromodulation, bio-inspiration, decision making

1

Introduction

In neuromodulation, a principle of neural activation already observed in crus-
tacea [5], a small set of neurons projects to most regions of the brain and can
modify their functioning and learning modes by acting on the intrinsic properties
of neurons and on the synaptic weights. Neuromodulators have been popular-
ized in the modeling domain by a paper by K. Doya [7], proposing how diﬀerent
phases of reinforcement learning might be implemented by global signals rep-
resenting such neuromodulators, where “dopamine signals the error in reward
prediction, serotonin controls the time scale of reward prediction, noradrenaline
controls the randomness in action selection, and acetylcholine controls the speed
of memory update” (quoted from [7]).

Concerning dopamine [12] and acetylcholine [13], the role of these neuro-
modulators has been deﬁned more precisely, relying on experimental data and
on more precise or more biologically informed models. In this paper, we propose
to revisit the role of noradrenaline (or norepinephrine, NE) and particularly of
its eﬀects on other brain regions. Whereas an excitatory attentional eﬀect is
generally reported for NE, we mention here a new inhibitory eﬀect on a speciﬁc
striatal region and explain why, in the brain and also in models, this additional
eﬀect is important for the global dynamics of the network. In the next sections,
we introduce more precisely some information about noradrenaline and the way
it is presently integrated in models, including data and results that will be im-
portant for our model that is subsequently presented together with simulation
results.

2

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

2 The noradrenergic system

NE originates mainly from the Locus Coeruleus (LC), a brainstem nucleus [4].
One acknowledged role of NE is to modify sensory processing in the thalamus
and the cortex [15, 16], depending on the level of arousal and attention required
by the external situation, proposed to be encoded by the tonic levels of NE
[4]. At low level, the animal is at rest (sleeping or grooming). A highly salient
stimulus (for example reliably announcing a reward) is going to increase tonic
NE level and trigger phasic NE burst to precisely focus attentional processing
on that stimulus and resist to distractors. The highest tonic levels of NE are
observed when the conditions are no longer predictable (for example in unknown
or changing environments) and require to explore among possible relevant stimuli
to extract new contingencies [2].

This general view relating the level of NE to the level of arousal is consis-
tent with its often mentioned implication in choosing between exploitation and
exploration (with higher levels) of sensory criteria to select actions [2]. This is
also consistent with the reported implication of NE during reversal [1] when a
sensory criterion to predict a reward becomes suddenly invalid and requires to
look for another predictive sensory criterion. This has been termed unexpected
uncertainty in [17], in contrast to expected uncertainty, corresponding to the
stochasticity of the criterion and encoded by another neuromodulator, acetyl-
choline, and requiring only patience and not reconsideration of the criterion.

Going deeper in the description of LC aﬀerents and eﬀerents can allow for a
more precise interpretation of the role of NE, based on information available in
LC to decide on the release of NE and the nature of NE actions in LC targets.
Inputs to LC are of three kinds. Low level signals from peripheral centres give
basic information about level of arousal from the sympathetic system and about
salient sensory inputs from the oculomotor system [4]. More elaborated elements
of information are sent by the central nucleus of the amygdala and the medial
prefrontal cortex towards LC [16]. They are generally believed to contribute to
evaluate the nature of the present situation, and correspond to information like
reward history or response conﬂicts and errors [2]. Other noteworthy inputs to
LC are from other neuromodulatory centres which reciprocally inﬂuence LC [16].
LC projects to most brain regions and more heavily to attentional struc-
tures like the parietal sensory cortex, where NE can enhance evoked activity
[3]. Importantly, the basal ganglia is the only cerebral structure not receiving
projections from LC, except for the shell region of the nucleus accumbens, where
NE is reported to have an inhibitory eﬀect [11].

3 Modeling the role of noradrenaline

In addition to [7, 17] other modeling papers have proposed to implement NE
mechanisms. McClure and colleagues [10] propose that the level of NE is esti-
mated by an evaluation function depending on the reward rate (corresponding to

Model of Noradrenergic function

3

input of the orbitofrontal cortex to LC) and measures of response conﬂict (cor-
responding to input of the anterior cingulate cortex, ACC, to LC), computed
from two windows of long term and short term history of activity.

The model by Aston Jones and colleagues [2] proposes a mechanism im-
plementing the trade-oﬀ between exploration and exploitation, with the Drift
Diﬀusion Model (DDM). This model can be applied for tasks with two choices
with two units acting as accumulators, integrating over time possibly noisy sig-
nals favoring each choice and responding when the diﬀerence of levels exceeds a
threshold. Interestingly, DDM has been originally proposed to reproduce reac-
tion times and error rates in decision making processes but appears to explain
well neuronal responses recorded during such processes. In the model, the value
of the threshold is of course an important parameter, but also the gain of ac-
cumulator integration that can be modiﬁed to reach the threshold at diﬀerent
speeds. This simple model, which can be equivalently implemented with units
in mutual inhibition, has been shown to be a good approximation of the opti-
mal decision [6] but remains limited to two-alternative choices. It has also been
shown to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio in the diﬀerence between the input
signals and, when this ratio changes, [6] shows that the gain of the units (or
their mutually inhibiting strength) must be modiﬁed accordingly.

It is proposed in [2] that, when tonic NE is released (in a situation identiﬁed
as unexpected uncertainty), the gain of the sensory units will increase and this
will facilitate random activation of sensory neurons and accordingly exploration.
Nevertheless, we have observed some limitations, trying to apply DDM to act
not only on a sensory layer of units representing candidate stimuli (as it is the
case in [2, 6]) but on the sensory part of a neural network learning to associate
a representation of the value of stimuli to the best response, presented in [8] as
an implementation of decision making in the brain.

In the [8] network, associations have been learned between sensory neurons
and neurons triggering the actions. Even if by NE gain increase a new stimulus is
more activated, associative weights might compensate and trigger the habitual
action. To tell it diﬀerently, an excitatory noise in the sensory layer does not
necessarily trigger motor exploration.

4 Our model

We have mentioned above a biological fact that has not yet been exploited in
models, the inhibitory eﬀect of NE in the shell [11]. In fact, the shell is a striatal
region known to participate in the evaluation of the value of stimuli in the orbito-
fontal cortex which can in turn activate motor responses toward stimuli. We can
consequently explore another alternative of NE neuromodulation eﬀect, where
its action in the shell can inhibit previously learned sensorimotor associations.
Our model uses the DANA library for neuronal representation and compu-
tation [14]. It extends the model presented in [8] by studying the eﬀect of explo-
ration and tonic NE on it. All the code for the model and parameters are open-

4

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

source and available online at https://github.com/carreremax/basal-ganglia-ne.
We will only describe and discuss here changes made from the Guthrie model.

Fig. 1. Main features of our model compared to [8]. ST-PRED and LT-PRED are
respectively short-term predictor and long-term predictor which predict reward arrival
as the average reward from a long and short amount of trials. Each prediction inhibits
the excitatory input of the other in ACC, resulting in ACC activation and NE release
in LC only in case of discrepancy between the predictions, ie. in case of unexpected
uncertainty. NE release is then used to trigger exploration in [8], by facilitation of
cortical excitation and inhibition of striatal inputs.

The level of NE is computed as the diﬀerence (or conﬂict) between a slow

and a fast predictor as follows:

The noradrenaline system receives inputs from short and long-term reward
predictors, as shown in ﬁgure 1. Short and long-term predictors are computed
as the average reward on the respectively n st trials and n lt trials last trials.

lt prediction = (

(cid:88)

k∈n lt trials

rewardk)/n lt trials

st prediction = (

(cid:88)

k∈n st trials
with rewardk the reward received at trial k.

rewardk)/n st trials

These rewards are respectively sent as inputs to two ACC units computing

the conﬂict between the two predictions, ne s and ne l:

Similarly :

dUne s
dt

dUne l
dt

= τ ∗ (−Une s + st prediction − lt prediction)

= τ ∗ (−Une l + lt prediction − st prediction)

So the long-term prediction is inhibiting the ne s, and the short-term one is in-
hibiting ne l. The level of NE release, ne, is then taken as the sum of nes and nel
activities. As a result, if both old and recent predictions are not predicting any

Short-term reward predictionST-PREDGuthrie's modelSensory loopAssociative and motor loopsActionexcitatory eectinhibitory eectNoradrenalinergic systemExcitatory connectionInhibitory connectionIndirect connection (through other areas)Model of Noradrenergic function

5

reward, neither nes nor nel activities are strong, and then NE concentration is
low. Symmetrically, if both systems are predicting rewards, the two predictions
will inhibit the projections of each other, thus resulting in a low NE release.
However, if only one system is predicting a reward, ie if the prediction follow-
ing recent history is diﬀerent from the prediction based on long history, the
corresponding NE population will have a strong, non-inhibited activation, thus
triggering a high level of NE release, corresponding to the fact that the reward
contingency has recently changed.

Consistent with previous models, NE eﬀect at the cortical level is an excita-

tory gain :

dVctx
dt

= f (Uctx ∗ (1 + ne) ∗ (1 + noise))

where Vctx and Uctx are respectively the ﬁring rate and membrane potential of
cortical neurons, f and noise respectively the sigmoid function and activation
noise used in [8]. NE inhibitory eﬀect is an original mechanism added in our
model, and impacts the output gain of projection from cortex to shell :

gain = g ctx cog str cog ∗ ne modulation

with g ctx cog str cog the constant gain between cortex and striatum in the
sensory loop, and ne modulation the modulatory eﬀect of NE.

ne modulation = max(0.5, 1 − ne ef f iciency ∗ ne)

NE modulatory eﬀect is limited to halving excitatory projections from cortex
to shell, consistent with the eﬀect of NE observed in [11]. ne ef f iciency is a
constant set to 0.8, so that only maximum values of ne will provoke a minimum
value of ne modulation.

Architectural parameters

Meaning
Initial values of critic’s predictions
Learning rate of the critic
learning rate for long term potentiation
learning rate for long term depression

Parameter
init critic
α critic
α LT P
α LT D
g ctx cog str cog gain from cognitive cortex to cognitive striatum
g ctx cog str ass gain from cognitive cortex to associative striatum
g ne exc
g ne inh
n st trials
n lt trials

gain of excitatory projections in NE populations
gain of inhibitory projections in NE populations
Number of trials taken into account for the short-term predictor 3
Number of trials taken into account for the long-term predictor 30

Value
0.25
0.2
0.0001
0.00005
1.2
0.3
1.0
-1.0

Fig. 2. Description and values of the parameters added or modiﬁed compared to [8].

One of the main problems with unexpected uncertainty-based exploration is
the learning rate of the model. If the learning speed of the network is too slow,

6

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

the network will perform exploration, but will not be able to learn based on this
exploration. At the opposite, if the learning is fast enough to learn from a few
trials of exploration, it may converge too quickly, which can lead to sub-optimal
choice or stability issues. To address this problem, we modiﬁed the learning rate
of the critic module in the Guthrie’s model, from previously 0.025 to 0.2, so
that the critic could learn based on exploration, and we added critics’ prediction
as a sensory input of the network. Consequently, exploration helps the critic to
learn insights of the values of alternative strategies, and such values are taken
into account in the sensory loop, which in turn helps the network to choose the
relevant alternative strategies, and learn from it.

5 Experiments

In order to analyze NE eﬀects in the cortex and the shell, together with the switch
between exploration and exploitation, we tested our model on reversal learning.
At each trial, two sensory CS are simultaneously presented to the network, on
two random positions during 2500ms and the network has to perform an action
toward one of the CS. As soon as the model performs an action, reward is
distributed accordingly to the reward probability of the chosen CS. If no CS
is selected after the 2500ms of presentation, the network will not receive any
reward. Then neural activities go down to their initial values, and we proceed
to the next trial. The acquisition phase consists in 40 trials, in order to perform
over-training and to allow habit formation. In each trial, one CS is systematically
rewarded while the other is not. During the reversal, which lasts for 40 trials,
reward rates for each CS are switched, so the network has to detect the change
in reward contingencies and to switch to the other CS.

In ﬁg.3, we report the average performance and decision time on 100 reversal
experiments with and without NE release. Each experiment is performed with
a “naive” model. The model correctly learns to choose the best rewarded CS
during the exploration and reversal phases. However, NE release allows to per-
form random exploration, and to gradually learn from this exploration, resulting
in a faster convergence than networks without exploration (ﬁg.3.A). In addition
NE release also increases the decision time of the model during the ﬁrst trials
of reversal (ﬁg.3.B). This is in accordance with [9] results, showing that animals
with NE depletion respond with greater rapidity when perseverating. Fig.3.C
shows the release of noradrenaline during trials, which is indeed proportional to
unexpected uncertainty, with a peak at the reversal onset.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have reported a model and associated experiments that illus-
trate the interest of neuromodulation, as a way to modulate existing networks,
instead of complexifying their architecture. This is particularly the case for no-
radrenaline, and its conﬁrmed role in the trade-oﬀ between exploration and
exploitation. As illustrated in our experiments, NE-based exploration increases

Model of Noradrenergic function

7

Fig. 3. Reversal experiments for our decision making model with NE eﬀects (blue) or
without NE eﬀects (red). Each curve is the average of 100 experiments performed each
time with a “naive” model. Surrounding shaded areas indicate the standard deviation
for each curve. (A) Average performance by trials. Both NE and non-NE models are
able to acquire CS values and to learn reversal. Exploration allows NE model to detect
quicker the change in reward contingency, and to correctly perform faster than the non-
NE one. (B) Average convergence time. During the ﬁrst trials of reversal, exploration
by inhibition of the striatum induces a larger response time for NE model. (C) Average
release of NE. NE release is important at the beginning of exploration, and larger during
the ﬁrst trials of reversal. It correlates with unexpected uncertainty.

the convergence speed of a decision network in an unexpected situation, which
is a decisive adaptive property for animals and other autonomous systems.

We have pointed out that another solution for NE-based exploration can be
the inhibition of learnt rules rather than the excitation of the sensory gain, and
have shown a biologically-inspired, neuronal implementation of it, using reported
NE eﬀect in the shell [11]. Its excitatory eﬀect in the cortex, widely used in other
models, is still present here. Yet, simulation of the model with only striatal NE
(not reported here) still exhibits exploration, but with longer decision time. We
hypothetize here that because the task does not require exploration of additional
representation in the cortex, cortical NE is not necessary for exploration. If the
task needs discovery and creation of adequate cortical representation, like for
extra-dimensional shift, it would need cortical NE. Another prediction to be
tested in both computational and experimental neuroscience is that inhibiting
NE release in the shell should both impede exploration and decrease the decision
time. These predictions are explored in ongoing work.

10203040506070800.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Performance1.000.581.000.40ReversalA1020304050607080100200300400500600700800900Response time (ms)248.55455.46226.75427.75B1020304050607080Trial number0.00.20.40.60.81.0NE release0.030.000.000.00C8

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

References

1. Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., Kubiak, P.: Conditioned responses of monkey locus
coeruleus neurons anticipate acquisition of discriminative behavior in a vigilance
task. Neuroscience 80(3), 697–715 (Jul 1997)

2. Aston-Jones, G., Cohen, J.D.: An integrative theory of Locus Coeruleus-
Norepinephrine function: Adaptive Gain and Optimal Performance. Annual Re-
view of Neuroscience 28(1), 403–450 (2005)

3. Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., Cohen, J.: Role of locus coeruleus in attention and

behavioral ﬂexibility. Biological Psychiatry 46(9), 1309–1320 (Nov 1999)

4. Berridge, C.W., Waterhouse, B.D.: The locus coeruleus-noradrenergic system:
modulation of behavioral state and state-dependent cognitive processes. Brain Re-
search Reviews 42(1), 33–84 (2003)

5. Bouret, S., Sara, S.J.: Network reset: a simpliﬁed overarching theory of locus
coeruleus noradrenaline function. Trends in Neurosciences 28(11), 574–582 (2005)
6. Brown, E., Gao, J., Holmes, P., Bogacz, R., Gilzenrat, M., Cohen, J.D.: Simple
Neural Networks that optimize decisions. Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos 15(03), 803–826
(Mar 2005), http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/s0218127405012478

7. Doya, K.: Metalearning and neuromodulation. Neural Networks 15(4-6), 495–506

(Jun 2002), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0893-6080(02)00044-8

8. Guthrie, M., Leblois, A., Garenne, A., Boraud, T.: Interaction between cognitive
and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision making: a computational
study. Journal of Neurophysiology 109(12), 3025–3040 (Jun 2013)

9. Mason, S.T., Iversen, S.D.: An investigation of the role of cortical and cerebellar
noradrenaline in associative motor learning in the rat. Brain Research 134(3), 513–
527 (Oct 1977), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(77)90826-5

10. McClure, S., Gilzenrat, M., Cohen, J.: An exploration-exploitation model based on
norepinepherine and dopamine activity. In: Weiss, Y., Sch¨olkopf, B., Platt, J. (eds.)
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 18, pp. 867–874. MIT Press
(2006), http://www.csbmb.princeton.edu/\~{}smcclure/pdf/MGC\\_NIPS.pdf
11. Nicola, S.M., Malenka, R.C.: Modulation of synaptic transmission by dopamine
and norepinephrine in ventral but not dorsal striatum. Journal of neurophysiology
79(4), 1768–1776 (Apr 1998), http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9535946

12. O’Reilly, R.C., Frank, M.J., Hazy, T.E., Watz, B.: PVLV: The primary value and
learned value Pavlovian learning algorithm. Behavioral neuroscience 121(1), 31–49
(Feb 2007), http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0735-7044.121.1.31

13. Pauli, W.M., O’Reilly, R.C.: Attentional control of associative learning–a possible
role of the central cholinergic system. Brain Research 1202, 43–53 (Apr 2008)
14. Rougier, N.P., Fix, J.: DANA: Distributed (asynchronous) Numerical and Adaptive
modelling framework. Network: Computation in Neural Systems 23(4), 237–253
(Dec 2012)

15. Sadacca, B.F., Wikenheiser, A.M., Schoenbaum, G.: Toward a theoretical role for
tonic norepinephrine in the orbitofrontal cortex in facilitating ﬂexible learning.
Neuroscience (Apr 2016)

16. Sara, S.J., Bouret, S.: Orienting and Reorienting: The Locus Coeruleus Mediates

Cognition through Arousal. Neuron 76(1), 130–141 (Oct 2012)

17. Yu, A.J., Dayan, P.: Uncertainty, Neuromodulation, and Attention. Neuron 46(4)

(2005)

