Evaluating Playful Creative Problem Solving in Kyiv and Ukrainian
Refugees in France Oksana Strutynska, Margarida Romero

To cite this version:

Oksana Strutynska, Margarida Romero. Evaluating Playful Creative Problem
Solving in Kyiv and Ukrainian Refugees in France. Hybrid research
symposium within the CreaComp research programme “Co-creative
problem-solving and technology enhanced learning from a sociocultural
perspective”, Oct 2023, Nice, France. 2023. ￿hal-04601414￿

HAL Id: hal-04601414

https://hal.univ-cotedazur.fr/hal-04601414

Submitted on 4 Jun 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Evaluating Playful Creative Problem Solving in Kyiv and Ukrainian
Refugees in France

Margarida Romero1,2*, Oksana Strutynska1,3**

* margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr / https://margaridaromero.blog/, **
o.v.strutynska@npu.edu.ua

#CreaCube

1.  LINE lab, ANR Creamaker PI, Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France
2.  Université Laval, Québec, Canada
3.  Dragomanov Ukrainian State University, Kyiv, Ukraine

IDEX UCAjedi Advanced Research Program for Ukrainian researchers

Step 1

Why is creative problem solving so important?

Step 2

Step 3 CPS, Divergent & Convergent Thinking

Creativity is a complex human process that can be observed in a high
diversity of learning, professional, and personal tasks

Creative problem solving (CPS) is a way of using creativity to develop
new ideas and solutions to problems

Source: Runco, M.A. (2011) ‘Divergent Thinking’, in Mark A. Runco and
S.R. Pritzker (eds) Encyclopedia of Creativity (Second Edition). San
Diego: Academic Press, pp. 400-403.

Step 4

Divergent Thinking Components

Step 5 Creative problem solving with educational robotics

CPS can be supported with visuospatial constructive play objects (VCPO)
or artefacts such as modular robotics

The ANR CreaMaker project aims to advance the study of individual and
collective creative problem solving through educational robotics

Source: Guilford, J. (1967) ‘Creativity: Yesterday, today and tomorrow’,
The Journal of Creative Behavior, 1, pp. 3-14.

Step 6

Research Goal: How the stress impacts on creativity & students’ creative
problem solving skills during wartime?

Educational robotics

Educational robotics is a cross-disciplinary area of students’ learning
and present educational trend

To evaluate divergent thinking, learner-players are asked to solve the
CPS #CreaCube playful task

Number of participants (N=33): Nice group (Ukrainian students in France)
- 17 students (normal conditions) Kyiv group (Ukrainian students in
Ukraine) - 16 students (difficult conditions: air raid sirens, sounds of
explosions, cut of electricity, cold weather and no heating etc.)

Future/present robotics jobs:

● robotics teacher ● operator of multifunctional

robotic systems ● robot designer ● designer of neuro-interfaces

for robot management

● designer of “smart” houses ● unmanned aerial interface

designer

● service engineer in robotics ● robotics programmer ● medical robot
operator ● drone operator ● drone engineer

Module 1. The EU experience in digital transformation of education.
Module 2. The EU experience in STREAM education. Module 3. The EU
experience in CPS with educational robotics.

2023 @MargaridaRomero, @OksanaStrutynska


