A Natural History of Skills
Thomas Boraud, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Thomas Boraud, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier. A Natural History of Skills. Progress in Neuro-
biology, 2018, 171, pp.114-124. ￿10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.08.003￿. ￿hal-01874690￿

HAL Id: hal-01874690

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01874690

Submitted on 14 Sep 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

A Natural History of Skills

1

A Natural History of Skills

Thomas Boraud1,2,3,4,\*, Arthur Leblois1,2,3,\*, Nicolas P. Rougier2,5,6,\*

1 CNRS, UMR 5293, IMN, 33000 Bordeaux, France
2 University of Bordeaux, UMR 5293, IMN, 33000, Bordeaux, France
3 CNRS, French-Israeli Neuroscience Lab, 33000 Bordeaux, France
4 CHU de Bordeaux, IMN Clinique, 33000 Bordeaux, France
5 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 33405, Talence, France
6 LaBRI, University of Bordeaux, IPB, CNRS, UMR 5800, 33405 Talence, France
\* These authors contributed equally to this work.

(cid:0)
Abstract .....................................................................................................................................2
1. Introduction ...........................................................................................................................3
1.1. The function(s) of the forebrain .....................................................................................4
1.2. Habits, automaticity & skills ...........................................................................................5
2. Multiple systems at work.......................................................................................................6
2.1. The mammalian cortex ...................................................................................................7
2.2. The thalamus and the basal ganglia................................................................................8
2.3. Skill learning and synaptic plasticity .............................................................................10
2.3.1 Hebbian learning.....................................................................................................11
2.3.2. Dopamine and reinforcement learning .................................................................11
3. Parallel emergence across evolution ...................................................................................11
3.1. Lamprey ........................................................................................................................12
3.2. Fishes, frogs & reptiles..................................................................................................14
3.3. Mammals ......................................................................................................................15
3.4. Birds ..............................................................................................................................16
Box 1 ........................................................................................................................................17
4. The automatization of skills .................................................................................................19
4.1. Distinct but complementary roles ................................................................................19
4.2. A counter-intuitive hypothesis .....................................................................................20
4.3. Compatibility with the alternative hypotheses.............................................................20
4.4 The entanglement of two systems ................................................................................22
4.5. Computational Approach..............................................................................................22
6. Conclusion ...........................................................................................................................25
Acknowledgement...................................................................................................................26
Bibliography.............................................................................................................................27

A Natural History of Skills

2

Abstract

The dorsal pallium (a.k.a. the cortex in the mammals) makes a large loop circuit with the basal 
ganglia and the thalamus known to control and adapt behavior but the who's who of the 
functional roles of these structures is still debated. Influenced by the Triune brain theory that 
was proposed in the early sixties, many current theories propose a hierarchical organization 
on the top of which stands the cortex to which the subcortical structures are subordinated. In 
particular, habits formation has been proposed to reflect a switch from conscious on-line 
control of behavior by the cortex, to a fully automated subcortical control. In this review, we 
propose to revalue the function of the network in light of the current experimental evidence 
concerning the anatomy and physiology of the basal ganglia-cortical circuits in vertebrates. 
We briefly review the current theories and show that they could be encompassed in a broader 
framework of skill learning and performance. Then, after reminding the state of the art 
concerning the anatomical architecture of the network and the underlying dynamic processes, 
we summarize the evolution of the anatomical and physiological substrate of skill learning and 
performance among vertebrates. We then lay out our hypothesis that the development of 
automatized skills relies on the BG teaching cortical circuits and is actually a late feature linked 
with the development of a specialized cortex or pallium that evolved in parallel in different 
taxa. We finally propose a minimal computational framework where this hypothesis can be 
explicitly implemented and tested.

A Natural History of Skills

3

1. Introduction

The frontal cortex, the basal ganglia (BG) and the thalamus are associated into a tripartite functional 

loop known as the cortex-basal ganglia loop (CBG loop). Since the early 90s, we roughly subdivide this 

broad network into 3 subparts, from the central sulcus to the frontal pole: a motor loop, a cognitive 

loop and a limbic loop. This terminology has been coined by human/primate anatomists, physiologists 

and clinicians according to the functions associated to the corresponding cortical area. The motor loop 

(a.k.a. the extrapyramidal loop for the anatomists) drives voluntary movement and learning, the 

cognitive loop performs planning and decision making, while the limbic loop is in charge of emotions 

and mood. Despite different functional roles, the similarities in the architecture of these loops bring to 

the idea that they share the same dynamical properties and process neural information along similar 

mechanisms. However, if everybody agreed that these processes lie ultimately upon a focal activation 

of a specific cortical area that triggers an action/decision/emotion (at least in primates), there are many 

discrepancies in the literature about the who’s who (what’s what?) of the relationship between neural 

substrate and functions (Daw et al., 2005; Graybiel, 2008; Pasupathy and Miller, 2005; Samejima and 

Doya, 2007).

The question is insidiously overshadowed by the triune brain theory (1973) proposed by Paul D. 

MacLean in the 1970s. Briefly, this theory assumes that the brain evolved in three stages, each of them 

adding new behavioral features to the ethogram (the inventory of behaviors) of the species granted 

with this upgrade. At first, appeared a reptilian brain (grossly the diencephalon and the BG) that brings 

instinctual behaviors (aggression, dominance, territoriality, ritual displays, etc.). Then, the paleo-

mammalian complex (limbic system) involved in feeding, reproductive and parental behaviors in 

animals granted with the ability to display motivation and emotion. Finally, species at the top of the 

evolutionary tree were gifted with a neo-mammalian brain that allowed them to perform abstract 

thinking, planning, and for the most advanced of them language. Each level inhibited the lower one 

and the key to human neuropsychiatric pathology stems from defects in these inhibition processes. 

The triune brain theory was widely diffused because of its elegant adequacy between structure and 

function and vague similarities with Freud's psychoanalysis theories. It became familiar to a broad 

popular audience thanks to authors such as Carl Sagan or Arthur Koestler. Even if the triune brain 

theory is long considered as outdated (Hodos and Butler, 1997; Striedter, 2005), it is still influential in 

psychology. For our concern, it influenced the neurobiology of decision making, by establishing 3 

dogmas: i) there is a hierarchical classification of higher brain functions; ii) each function is underlain 

by a specific anatomic structure and iii) structures compete against each other in order to produce a 

A Natural History of Skills

4

behavior. All the theories that have been proposed to explicit the respective role of the different 

components of the CBG loop (see below) encompassed these 3 features and most (but not all of them) 

considered that the cortex must be in charge of the more elaborated brain functions and sometime 

even is the ultimate umpire of the competition. This conceptual framework gave birth to a flourishing 

literature with partially overlapping concepts opposing automatism to voluntary action, habits to goal 

oriented behavior, model free vs model-based decision making, etc.

In this review, we propose to step aside from this conceptual background in order to revalue the 

function of the CBG loop. We will first briefly review the current theories and show that they could be 

encompassed in a broader framework of skill learning and performance. Then, after reminding the 

state of the art concerning the anatomical architecture of the network and the underlying dynamic 

processes, we will summarize the evolution of the anatomical and physiological substrate of skill 

learning and performance among a few classes of vertebrate. We will lay out our hypothesis that the 

development of automatized skills relies on the BG teaching cortical circuits and is actually a late 

feature linked with the development of a specialized cortex or pallium that evolved in parallel in 

different taxa. We will confront it to other current hypotheses on the function of CBG circuits. Finally, 

we present a minimal computational framework were this hypothesis can be explicitly implemented 

and tested.

1.1. The function(s) of the forebrain

As we stated above, most of the theories proposed lie in the contrast between a deliberative behavior 

that necessitates constant updating and an automatic process. Influenced by psychology, this 

automatic process has been coined a habit. 

The first theory stands that the cognitive CBG loop supports deliberative/planned behavior, while the 

motor one support habits (Belin et al., 2009; Yin and Knowlton, 2006; Yin et al., 2005). The former 

dominates the latter acting in new context and relying secondary on the more rustic motor system 

when things become boringly repetitive.

In the second theory, the opposition is between the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in charge of deliberative 

processes and the BG supporting habitual behaviors (Daw et al., 2005; Daw et al., 2006).

The third hypothesis is more innovative as it reverses the hierarchy and emphasizes learning rather 

than habits per se. It posits that the BG drive learning in the cortical areas and become increasingly less 

A Natural History of Skills

5

engaged in action performance decision making as the task is learned (Graybiel, 2008; Helie et al., 

2015; Piron et al., 2016; Samejima and Doya, 2007). Our theory, which is derived from this latter one, 

encompasses the concept of habits in to the broader concept of skills as it’ll be explained below.

1.2. Habits, automaticity & skills

When the literature about the neural anatomy of the decision-making process comes under scrutiny, 

it is important to keep in mind that authors coming from different background use behavior with 

different meaning. Those coming from a behaviorist background have a very precise definition for 

habits but consider goal-oriented decision making as a kind of default mode response (Balleine and 

Dickinson, 1992; Balleine and O'Doherty, 2010; Dickinson, 1985). For the ones inspired by economics 

(a trend often dubbed neuroeconomics), goal-oriented decision making implies deliberative choice 

while habits are unconscious automatisms acquired slowly after intensive training that is less 

systematically operationalized (Graybiel, 2008; Seger and Spiering, 2011).

Instead of focusing on the competition process between habitual/automatic and goal-oriented 

behaviors during a decision at a given time, we propose to reframe the question around the dynamics 

of skill acquisition. Each decision reflects the degree of skill expertise acquired by a subject in a specific 

field. According to this framework, explorative, vicarious behaviors are the trace of an early stage of 

skill acquisition while automatic stereotyped ones appear once skills are consolidated. But the process 

is continuous rather than binary and the border between the two extreme forms of behavior is fuzzy. 

Another important consequence is that we can identify cases in which the skill is never automatized 

by lack of time or because the anatomical architecture doesn’t allow it. 

We propose then i) to substitute for habits the broader concept of skills and ii) to include an 

evolutionary dimension. 

Motor skills, as opposed to habits, do not necessarily occur repeatedly over time (Graybiel, 2008), but 

involve many features of habits: (i) they are learned, and they become (ii) automatic, (iii) stereotyped, 

and (iv) inflexible after extensive training. We thus voluntarily step away from the dependence of 

habits on reward devaluation and its definition as opposed to goal-directed behavior. We finally 

propose to broaden the definition of skills to the cognitive and limbic network, encompassing the same 

properties as illustrated on the Table 1. 

A Natural History of Skills

6

Flexible learning phase

Inflexible stereotyped phase

(acquisition/exploration)

(automatization/exploitation)

Motor

Skill acquisition

Stereotyped gestures

Playing behavior

Motor Babbling

Motor repertoire

Cognitive

Deliberative decision

Heuristics

Causality experience

Cognitive bias & expertise

Exploratory behavior

Attention & Memory

Limbic

Hedonistic exploration

Preferences & sexual orientation

Taste learning

Emotional lability

“Tastes”

Empathy

Table 1: classification of skills according to functional domains and phase. 

The migration from the flexible learning phase to the inflexible stereotyped phase can be broken down 

into three stages (Fitts, 1964): the cognitive stage (early acquisition), the associative stage (smoothing 

performances) and the autonomous stage (continuous improvement). From our perspective, the two 

first phases correspond to the flexible learning phase that is characterized by an initial high level of 

error (early acquisition) and correspond to the early exploration of the parameter space, until a gradual 

reduction of errors occurs (smoothing performances). The late phase (continuous improvement) 

corresponds to the full and automated exploitation of the initial learning characterized by a very low 

level of errors in the absence of any feedback. This also corresponds to the proposal by (Anderson, 

1982) where the author considers only two stages, a declarative stage and a procedural stage for the 

acquisition of cognitive skills.

2. Multiple systems at work

A Natural History of Skills

7

Before describing the natural history of skills, it may be useful to start with a summary of the brain 

structures involved in primates (including humans) and to describe their evolution starting from the 

most ancient vertebrates.

2.1. The mammalian cortex

In mammals, the brain circuits underlying skill learning and execution encompass orbito-frontal cortex 

(OFC), Prefrontal Cortex (PFC), Anterior Cingular Cortex (ACC), and motor cortical areas: Premotor 

Cortex (PMC), Supplementary Motor Area (SMA) and Motor Cortex (MC) per se. They are organized 

following a hierarchical manner: OFC is involved in valuation and manipulation of abstract concepts 

(Daw et al., 2006; Samejima and Doya, 2007), PFC and ACC are involved in deliberative processes and 

the motor areas are involved in the expression of behaviors (Alexander and Crutcher, 1990b) and are 

the major interface between the brain and the musculoskeletal system. However, this interfacing is 

highly variable from one species to another. For example, concerning the motor areas, pyramidal 

neurons reach directly spinal motoneurons in a significant proportion only in primates, but not in 

rodents or cats (Lemon and Griffiths, 2005). They indeed act more as a modulatory system than a 

driving system in the latter; decorticated rats (Whishaw et al., 1981) or cats (Bjursten et al., 1976) can 

still behave quite normally, unlike decorticated primates (Travis and Woolsey, 1956).

The cortex is subdivided into 6 layers of neurons and comprises dozens of different types of cell types. 

The cortex is traditionally divided into multiple areas, which vary based on their cytoarchitecture, 

their inputs, their neurochemical signatures, the target of their projections and their function. At 

the microscopic level, each area can be divided into functional units, the cortical columns, which 

contain neurons that share the same receptive fields (for sensory areas) or behavioral tuning (for 

motor and cognitive areas). Briefly, the output of each column is provided by the output neurons, the 

glutamatergic pyramidal cells. On one hand, direct lateral excitation between pyramidal cells from the 

same or different columns provide the cortical columns with a mechanism for self and mutual 

excitation respectively. On the other hand, feedforward inhibition mediated by GABAergic inhibitory 

interneurons allows for lateral inhibition within and between columns (Horton and Adams, 2005). As 

the spread of lateral inhibition is thought to overcome that of the lateral excitation, the net effect of 

lateral interactions between columns likely tends toward mutual inhibition, allowing competition 

mechanisms between the columns that can drive behavior (Adesnik and Scanziani, 2010). 

A Natural History of Skills

8

2.2. The thalamus and the basal ganglia

The sub-cortical territories of the skill learning network include the anterior thalamus and the BG. 

Along a canonical model that was formalized back in the late 1980s, cortical and subcortical structures 

are organized into functional feedback loops (Figure 1) that influence the dynamic properties of the 

cortical areas (Albin et al., 1989; Alexander and Crutcher, 1990a; Alexander and Crutcher, 1990b; 

Parent and Hazrati, 1995a, b). The pyramidal neurons of the cortex send axons to the Striatum and 

the Subthalamic Nucleus (STN), which are the two main input structures of the BG. The former is made 

of several different populations of neurons of which the GABAergic medium spiny neurons (MSN), 

which represent more than 90% of the striatal neural population, are the outputs. The latter is made 

of at least one population of glutamatergic neurons. The main output structures of the BG are the 

internal segment of the Globus Pallidus (GPi) and the pars reticulata of the Substantia Nigra (SNr). 

Both are GABAergic structures. They send their inhibitory outputs mainly to the anterior thalamic 

nuclei (ventro-lateral and ventral anterior in primates) and also to the brainstem nuclei. The thalamus 

connects back to the cortex hence closing the loop with glutamatergic connections. The dynamic 

properties of the network are controlled by three pathways. The direct pathway conveys the cortical 

inputs through the striatum and the GPi/SNr. The indirect pathway is tri-synaptic, encompassing the 

striatum, the external part of the globus pallidus (GPe), the STN and then the GPi/SNr. The hyperdirect 

pathway corresponds to cortical input directly to the STN and then to the GPi. The direct pathway 

exerts a positive feedback on cortical area and the hyper-direct and indirect pathways exert a negative 

feedback (Mink, 1996; Nambu et al., 2000; Nambu et al., 2002).

Despite a topographic organization into at least three parallel functional loops (Alexander et al., 1986), 

controlling, respectively, limbic, cognitive and motor processes, the system also shows converging and 

diverging features. The reduction of the number of neurons from cortex to BG output in primates, for 

example, implies that one GPi neuron is influenced by more than one million cortical neurons (Parent 

and Hazrati, 1995a, b). This high convergence allows for the integration of a multitude of features in 

order to generate an appropriate behavior. On the contrary, the STN connections to the GPi are sparse 

and divergent. Because the STN is the common feature of the two negative feedback loops 

(hyperdirect and indirect), it makes this small structure the bottleneck of a powerful lateral inhibition 

system (Leblois et al., 2006a; Nambu et al., 2002). Indeed, even far-apart cortical areas may inhibit 

each other through the divergent cortico-subcortico-cortical pathway, and the spatial extent of the 

A Natural History of Skills

9

resulting mutual inhibition likely overcomes by several orders of magnitude the extent of lateral 

inhibition provided by cortical inhibitory interneurons. This classical vision should be updated with 

further connections inside BG (see Figure 1, in grey): the GPe also sends direct connections to the SNr, 

the GPi and with a specific population recently identified back to the striatum (Mallet et al., 2012; 

Mallet et al.). The anatomy of the striatum is also rendered further complex by various populations of 

GABAergic and cholinergic interneurons that make it more an integrative structure than a simple input 

layer (Parent and Hazrati, 1995a; Silberberg and Bolam, 2015). We already demonstrated (Box 1) that 

the CBG network encompasses all the necessary features to allow for the selection of motor programs 

out of the dynamic competition between the feedback loops (Leblois et al., 2006a). We also show that 

intrinsic noise is enough to shape motor output in new conditions without the necessity of pre-existing 

bias (Guthrie et al., 2013), making the system more efficient for exploration in new environments 

(Guthrie et al., 2013; Topalidou et al., 2015).

Outside the BG, there are other features that are often underrated and may significantly contribute 

to the dynamics of the CBG loop. Direct connections between the thalamic nuclei and the BG shortcut 

the cortical-subcortical loop. This second feedback loop possesses similar dynamic properties as the 

longer one (see Figure 1). The cortex also exerts a positive feedback to the thalamus creating another 

positive feedback loop outside the BG. It is extremely difficult to understand the dynamics of neuronal 

activity within these closed loop circuits with classical word models or “box and arrow” models. As an 

example, we have shown in the past that the closed loop structure within the BG-thalamo-cortical 

networks underlies the normal and pathological dynamics of neuronal activity and can only be 

revealed using the tools of non-linear dynamical theory (Leblois et al., 2006). For this reason, we will 

develop a theoretical framework to study the cooperation of the cerebellum and BG.

A Natural History of Skills

10

Figure 1. Schematic view of the cortico - basal ganglia - thalamus network (CBG) 
in primates. In black are showed the connections considered in the "classical" 
model: the BG works a three layers network - with 2 inputs (STN and STR), 2 
outputs (GPi/SNr) and 1 intermediary layer (GPe) - encompassed in a broad 
feedback loop to the cortex through the thalamus. In grey are showed connections 
that have been evidenced or emphasized in the last decade. GPe: Globus Pallidus 
pars Externa; GPi: Globus Pallidus pars Interna; SNr: Substantia Nigra pars 
Reticulata; STN: Subthalamic nucleus; STR: Striatum.

2.3. Skill learning and synaptic plasticity

Considering the organized cortex on one side and the powerful and versatile cortex-BG-thalamus loop 

on the other side, we have two systems that are able to drive actions and skills on their own. The 

former is able to perform well learned skills even if disconnected from subcortical influence from the 

BG (Andalman and Fee, 2009; Desmurget and Turner, 2010; Piron et al., 2016; Turner and Desmurget, 

2010), while the latter can also provide a sufficient substrate for many complex behaviors (Bartus and 

Levere, 1977; Jaldow et al., 1989; Kukleta and Libouban, 1967; Oakley, 1981). Why has such 

redundancy been selected through the evolutionary process? What are the advantages? What are the 

costs? A first hint may be provided by the plasticity underlying the learning process in each of the two 

systems.

A Natural History of Skills

11

2.3.1 Hebbian learning. Even if there is a very diffuse DA innervation of the prefrontal cortex, it is 

supposed that at this level, plasticity relies mainly on Hebbian learning (HL) principles (Keysers and 

Perrett, 2004; Song et al., 2000). If two synaptically connected cortical neurons are co-activated, they 

reinforce the synaptic weight of the connection between them. It follows that repetition of co-

activation will favor the genesis of neuronal assemblies that can be re-activated together later. If this 

connection is made through inhibitory neurons, it reinforces competition mechanisms. This system is 

simple and robust, but because of its insensitivity to the outcomes, it lacks flexibility.

2.3.2. Dopamine and reinforcement learning. Since the seminal works of Wolfram Schultz and his 

colleagues, it is known that dopamine (DA) is a neural substrate of the reward prediction error signal 

in the reinforcement learning (RL) process (Apicella et al., 1992; Fiorillo et al., 2003; Schultz, 1992). 

Briefly the dopaminergic neurons of the pars compacta of the Substantia Nigra and the ventral 

tegmental area (VTA) are able to encode the difference between the outcome of an action and the 

expectation of the subject. This signal is used by the target of the dopaminergic nuclei to modify their 

synaptic weight and therefore increase or decrease the probability to choose the same action in the 

next occurrence (Schultz, 2006; Schultz et al., 1997). This synaptic plasticity explains why performance 

increases by trial and error. The synapses between the pyramidal neurons and the MSN of the striatum 

are the major target of DA output in the brain and therefore it is where this plasticity is hypothesized 

to occur (Schultz, 2006; Schultz et al., 1997).

3. Parallel emergence across evolution

A picture starts to emerge with a cortical system that is able to create robust neuronal assemblies that 

drive behavior, displays the necessary dynamics to select a single behavioral output and decide on its 

own, but relies on a rather simple and unsupervised plasticity rule, and a subcortical system allowing 

more flexible behavioral adaptation thanks to more complex learning rules, but which involves a much 

larger and therefore slower and more energy demanding network. We are already far from a ventral 

deliberative system and an automatic dorsal one. Beyond the anatomical and functional organization 

of the brain, the triune brain hypothesis relies on a simplistic conception of evolution as a ladder (scala 

A Natural History of Skills

12

naturae), with the vertebrate brains going from “primitive” brains in lower vertebrates to “evolved” 

brains in mammals and ultimately humans, and the progressive and linear acquisition of more and 

more complex cognitive traits and behaviors along evolution. In the following, we will argue that in 

many vertebrate taxa, brains have evolved alongside to give rise to complex behavior. We will 

hereafter gather evidence that while an increase in the diversity and complexity of behaviors appears 

to require a growth of the dorsal pallium (DP), the control and learning of complex skills always rely on 

the interaction between the growing pallium and the “reptilian brain”, namely the BG loops. 

A look at vertebrate evolution and the parallel development of the various brain areas involved in 

motor control and skill learning may indeed shed light on the division of labor at play during complex 

behaviors. Vertebrate orders with quite distant common ancestors such as fishes, birds and mammals 

display contemporary species with complex skills such as avoiding predators, catching prey, 

communication, tool use and design, cooperation, etc. (Bird and Emery, 2009a, b; Gunturkun, 2012; 

Patton and Braithwaite, 2015). These behaviors require planning and the combination of multiple 

elementary movements into complex motor skills. Interestingly, the size of the pallium has increased 

in all three aforementioned orders, and the most gifted contemporary species display a larger 

pallium/cortex to brain mass ratio (Figure 2). This high ratio is somehow correlated to the number of 

neurons in the DP but the relationship is far from linear (Herculano-Houzel, 2011a, b; Herculano-Houzel 

et al., 2006; Wullimann and Vernier, 2007). 

Figure 2. Comparative evolution of the striatum and pallium in vertebrates. the ratio of the brain mass devoted to the 

pallium increase in parallel in various vertebrates' taxa. 

3.1. Lamprey

A Natural History of Skills

13

The lamprey, the oldest of all the vertebrates, appeared about 560 million years ago. Its relatively 

simple nervous system makes it a model of choice for studying networks involved in locomotor activity. 

The lamprey is devoid of fins and moves by undulating its body composed of a series of myotomes. 

Each is controlled by a couple of glutamatergic generators. When a motor command is sent into the 

cord from the Mesencephalic Locomotion Region (MLR) of the animal, a rhythmic activity is 

propagated in the different segments of the animal with a rostro-caudal shift generating a sinusoidal 

movement of the body of the animal which allows its displacement through the water. The MLR is 

somatotopically organized, thus, if a differential stimulus is exerted on the two sides, the animal will 

turn in the direction of the one stimulated most effectively. The animal can thus be piloted from this 

structure that receives, among other things, inputs from the diencephalon and especially from the 

thalamus. The latter allows for the interfacing between the sensory stimuli (visual, auditory, olfactory) 

and the motor system and receives massive inputs from the BG.

Even if BG are not as individualized as in the mammals, they are nonetheless composed of the same 

populations of neurons all intermingled in a single basal ganglia structure: MSN-like, GPi-like and GPe-

like GABAergic cells, STN-like glutamatergic neurons and various interneurons (Grillner et al., 2013). 

The functional organization is also very similar to the one of the mammals: MSN-like and STN-like 

populations receiving inputs from the thalamus and GPi-like sending output to the thalamus and the 

MLR. Between the input layer and the output, there are the three pathways described above: the 

direct, the indirect and the hyper-direct. Therefore, in lamprey, the thalamus and the BG are organized 

into a feedback loop very similar to the one described in more recent vertebrates (see Box 1). From 

this overall anatomical and physiological similarity, we can assume that the dynamical properties of 

the network are fundamentally the same. It implies that the competition mechanisms that can elicit 

the selection of motor programs (Leblois et al., 2006a) already exist in the lamprey and can drive motor 

behavior of the animal. Like mammals, the lamprey brain possesses dopaminergic nuclei that innervate 

thalamic-MSN synapses and an associated rudimentary limbic system able to inform the dopaminergic 

system about the rewarding value of actions. Even if it has not been demonstrated yet, it implies that 

lamprey already possesses the components of the RL process (Stephenson-Jones et al., 2012).

The most crucial difference between lamprey and mammals is the lack of a cortex. Instead they have 

a DP that represents only a very small fraction of the brain total mass. It is maybe already involved in 

locomotion behaviors as recently suggested (Ocana et al., 2015), and sends numerous input to the BG. 

However, the role of the pallium in behavior in the lamprey is likely limited. Beside its small side, the 

DP of the lamprey is not as well organized as the mammalian cortex. It consists mostly of excitatory 

neurons organized in 3 layers and it is devoid of the columnar organization and therefore it is highly 

A Natural History of Skills

14

unlikely that this rudimentary pallium can offer a consistent selection mechanism, in contrast with 

mammalian cortex (Pombal et al., 2009; Pombal and Puelles, 1999).

3.2. Fishes, frogs & reptiles

Lampreys belong to the informal group of the anamniotes (a.k.a. lower-vertebrates) that also includes 

the fishes and the amphibians. For many species in this group, the ethograms are quite limited: 

foraging, mating, fight and flight. There are differences between species in nuptial behavior or the 

mode of foraging (some are herbivores, others are carnivores) but, more importantly, some of the 

more recently appeared species have developed much more elaborated motor and cognitive skills, 

including nest building (Kawase et al., 2013), predation or escape strategies, or communication (Patton 

and Braithwaite, 2015). The emergence of such complex behaviors correlates with the growth of the 

pallium in several fish clades (Vernier, 2017). Interestingly, the development of the pallium during 

embryogenesis follows a different path in different fish clades: in one case (actinopterygians), the 

pallium develops by eversion of the cerebral hemispheres, while in another (sarcopterygians, from 

which tetrapods and then reptiles and mammals evolved) the cerebral hemispheres are shaped by an 

invagination process. These two strategies for increasing pallial size appeared independently during 

evolution, supporting the idea of parallel development of the DP in various phylogenetic branches that 

independently allowed the emergence of complex behaviors. The increase in pallial size leads to a wide 

distribution of the coefficient of encephalization among fishes, significantly overlapping with that of 

birds and mammals, even if the main part remains lower (Wullimann and Vernier, 2007). As in the case 

of the lamprey, the central role of the Thalamus-BG loop in foraging has been confirmed in some of 

these species (Finkenstadt, 1989; Patton and Grobstein, 1998). Its role in other behaviors remains to 

be demonstrated, but it is highly likely.

The term “reptiles” refers to several lines of different origins distributed in more than 9000 species. 

The first reptiles appeared around 340 million years (Benton and Donoghue, 2007). They exhibit a 

greater diversity of behavior than anamniotes and for some species such as crocodiles and lizards, a 

relatively high encephalization quotient (the ratio of brain weight to body weight) and more elaborate 

social behaviors have been described (Brumm and Zollinger, 2017; O'Connell and Hofmann, 2011). In 

these species, the DP still represents less than 20% of the total cerebral mass and the structure does 

not differ significantly from that of the anamniotes.

A Natural History of Skills

3.3. Mammals

15

Mammals appeared around 220 million years ago. There are approximately 5,400 species in this class 

that colonized deep water, land and air and it is among this class that the richest and most varied 

ethograms can be found, showing complex social behaviors (including highly hierarchical organization) 

and unprecedented cognitive performances. Two behavioral characteristics, linked to each other, 

distinguish them from other vertebrates. The first one is a period of dependence of young mammals 

that can last several years. The second is play. During the juvenile period, much of the time saved on 

the search for food is used to play (Bekoff et al., 1980). Although the function of this activity is still 

debated, it certainly has a central role in skill-learning processes including foraging and social 

behaviors. There is, moreover, a correlation between the complexity of the social organization of a 

species, the length of the juvenile period and the time spent playing (Bekoff et al., 1980). 

As we already stated above, beside its increase in size, the cortex represents a very significant 

improvement as compared to the DP, in particular its capacity to be able to perform selection in 

autonomy from subcortical feedbacks thanks to its architecture that associates positive feedback with 

strong lateral inhibition (Helie et al., 2015; Piron et al., 2016). The complex organization of the cortex 

may also be linked to the length of the juvenile period: it takes time to be trained in order to develop 

its own automatisms and therefore the period of infancy of the young mammals may be partly devoted 

to its training (in which game plays a significant role). A very significant fraction of the ethogram is thus 

controlled by the cortex, which can, under some circumstances, become autonomous from the 

subcortical inputs. During learning, the BG would play an important guiding role in early phase of 

training (Piron et al., 2016) while the strengthening of the cortico-cortical connections would allow the 

automatization and/or gradual development of habits, in which the cortex can choose by itself (albeit 

slower) if we disconnect the feedback after learning (Desmurget and Turner, 2008; Desmurget and 

Turner, 2010; Piron et al., 2016). This empowerment by the cortex thus captures quite well the 

dynamics of the goal-oriented decision making as well as automatic skill execution. Convergent 

experimental findings and theoretical investigations support this idea that the “engram” of 

automatized skills shifts to regions outside the basal ganglia after sufficient training, including the 

neocortex (Graybiel, 1998; Houk and Wise, 1995; O'Reilly and Frank, 2006; Pasupathy and Miller, 

2005). It can also explain the transfer of stimulus response association from the dorsomedial to the 

dorsolateral part of the CBG loop: once the connectivity between the cues and motor response is 

strong enough, inactivation of the ventral part, do not modify the response of the model. It could be 

noticed that as long as a sub-cortical feedback occurred, habits are reversible but it can take a very 

long time. However, if for one reason or another, sub-cortical feedback loops are disrupted, automatic 

A Natural History of Skills

16

skills cannot be reversed and this may account for some motor or cognitive disorders, such as tic or 

addictive behaviors (Helie et al., 2015).

3.4. Birds

Birds offer an interesting comparison of parallel evolution with mammals. They appeared 150 million 

years ago (later than the first mammals) on a branch that also carried the late dinosaurs (R.I.P.). 

Although descending all from a common ancestor, the 10,000+ extant species of birds present as much 

behavioral variety as mammals. It concerns courtship rituals that can take very different forms such as 

singing, complex displays or dances but also forms of communication concerning the establishment of 

a territory, defense against predators or the foraging. Many species of birds are also organized into 

social groups (Crook, 1965). Cognitive abilities of birds are known to be well developed. It is not a 

coincidence that the 2-armed bandit task, the gold standard of decision making task, was developed 

in pigeons (Herrnstein et al., 1989). Caledonian crows are able to develop the use of tools (Emery, 

2006) and are also able to solve abstract problems such as the Aesop fable task (Logan et al., 2014) 

with as good performance as seven-year-old children. Songbirds provide also a significant example of 

the extent of their learning abilities (Mooney, 1995; Nottebohm et al., 1990; Tchernichovski and 

Marcus, 2014). It is to be noticed that DP, thalamus and a part of the BG (called area X) are the main 

components of the neural network devoted to this ability. Playing behaviors have also been described 

in corvids and psittacines (Diamond and Bond, 2003). And finally, the magpie is the only non-mammal 

up to now that has passed successfully the mirror task for self-recognition (Prior et al., 2008).

The enrichment of the ethogram of birds is correlated with the morphological and functional 

modifications of their encephalon. First of all, most of the birds possess a higher encephalization 

quotient than anamniotes and reptiles. But it is the development of the DP which is the more 

remarkable in these species. It represents more than 30% of the brain mass and can exceed 50% in the 

corvids (57% in the Caledonian crow) and some songbirds (Cnotka et al., 2008; Herculano-Houzel, 

2011b; Willemet, 2013). In some species, the DP organized itself in a hierarchy of specialized nuclei, 

with each nucleus controlling a specific behavior or interacting with others to control more complex 

behaviors (Pfenning et al., 2014; Puelles et al., 2000; Reiner et al., 2004). 

For social behaviors such as singing, it has been shown that in adult birds, once the song is learned, 

the animals can sing even if the feedback from the BG region called area X is blocked (Bottjer et al., 

1989; Scharff and Nottebohm, 1991). Furthermore, motor corrections implemented in the song to 

A Natural History of Skills

17

correct vocal errors are initially driven through the CBG loop and later incorporated into a cortical 

pathway (Andalman and Fee, 2009; Warren et al., 2011). On the other hand, decorticated pigeons can 

still learn RL tasks (Cerutti and Ferrari, 1995). It implies that in birds, BG are necessary and sufficient 

for RL-based learning (Fee and Goldberg, 2011), but DP nuclei can work autonomously, just as mammal 

cortex, for stereotypic behaviors. These observations further suggest that CBG circuits provide 

behavioral adaptations that are subsequently stabilized by training premotor cortical areas.

Box 1

A

S

B

THL1

THL2

Thalamus

S

Frontal Cortex

IN1

IN2

C2

C1

STR1

STN1

STN2

STR2

STR1

STN1

STN2

STR2

GPi1

GPi2

Basal 
Ganglia

SNc

GPi2

GPi1

Basal 
Ganglia

SNc / VTA

Unit 1

Reward

action 1

Unit 2

action 2

Inhibitory
Excitatory
Modulatory

Plastic
Hebbian learning
Reinforcement learning

THL1

THL2

Thalamus

Unit 1

Unit 2

action 1

Reward

action 2

Figure 3: A. A putative architecture for the selection of action through a primitive model of the basal 

ganglia and the thalamus (e.g. Lamprey). The stimulus (S) presentation results in the initial co-

activation of two units in the thalamus (THL1 and THL2) until one of them is inhibited through the 

recurrent circuit (e.g. THL1 ⇾ STN1 ⇾ GPI2 ⊸ THL2) and allows for the selection of the other. 

Reinforcement learning occurs between Thalamus and Striatum. B. A more elaborated model with 

lateral competition mechanism inside the frontal cortex (e.g. primate). The stimulus (S) presentation 

results in the initial co-activation of the two units in the frontal cortex (C1 and C2) until one of them 

is inhibited through either the recurrent circuit (e.g. C1 ⇾ STN1 ⇾ GPI2 ⊸ THL2 ⇾ C2) and/or through 

the local competition conveyed by interneurons (e.g. C1 ⇾ IN1 ⊸ C2) and allows for the selection of 

the other. Reinforcement learning occurs between the thalamus and the striatum while Hebbian 

learning occurs between the parietal cortex (S) and the frontal cortex.

A Natural History of Skills

18

The interactions between neuronal assemblies in the cortex/DP, BG and thalamus are believed to allow 

the automatization of decision making and skills, as we describe in this review. A few essential 

mechanisms are postulated that allow the selection of motor programs based on their outcome and 

the automatization of this selection process (illustrated in the figure 3). These mechanisms are 

necessary for the algorithmic implementation of the selection and automatization process, and they 

rely on the anatomical structure and physiological properties of the network that have been revealed 

by decades of experimental investigation. These mechanisms are the following:

-

A competition process: The selection of motor programs, long thought to be at the heart of 

the function of the BG-thalamo-cortical network (Marsden, 1982; Mink and Thach, 1996). The 

selection of a program, or selective activation of a given cortical population in the presence of 

ambiguous inputs, requires a competition mechanism by which one population can inhibit 

others when selected to avoid multiple activations. Such a competition mechanism can be 

implemented through lateral inhibition (REF cortex; Wickens et al., 2007). In the present 

review, we postulate that competition mechanisms exist both at the DP/cortical level, through 

mutual or lateral inhibition mediated by inhibitory interneurons, and in the BG-thalamo-

cortical loop circuits, through the divergent STN-GPi connection that mediates an inhibitory 

interaction between various cortical populations (via the Cortex-STN-GPi-Thalamus-Cortex 

pathway, see Leblois et al., 2006). The latter mechanism could in principle mediate 

competition between remote cortical populations (the combination of the STN-GPi divergent 

connection and the feedback from GPi to frontal cortex allows inhibitory interaction between 

distant DP/cortical populations through the Ctx1-STN-GPi-Thalamus-Ctx2 pathway, see figure 

above). This competition mechanism across the BG-thalamo-cortical network is common to all 

vertebrates, from lamprey to primates. The underlying dynamical process rests on a symmetry 

breaking process between parallel CBG circuits and has been described in Leblois et al. (2006). 

On the contrary, the former intra-cortical competition mechanism through lateral inhibition in 

the DP or cortex can only exist in animals which DP/cortex contains the necessary ingredients 

for lateral inhibition: a powerful inhibitory population in the DP/cortex. Such mechanism 

(Piron et al., 2016; Topalidou, submitted) could be implemented in mammals and birds, which 

cortex and pallium contain sufficiently strong lateral inhibition (REF). Note that it only 

competition allows between neighboring or ‘not-too-far’ cortical populations (due to the 

limited range of lateral inhibition),

-

An outcome-dependent learning process: During the initial phase of skill learning, the agent 

(animal, human or artificial agent for modelling purposes) must learn to select the appropriate 

actions to optimize their outcome. This can be achieved only if the plasticity rules applied in 

A Natural History of Skills

19

the neuronal assembly driving the selection of the motor program depend on the outcome of 

the action. In the BG, it is long known that DA signaling denotes the rewarding value of actions 

performed (more exactly the reward prediction error, REF operant conditioning?), and any 

plasticity rule that is modulated by the dopaminergic signal will therefore qualify as an 

outcome-dependent learning process (see figure above).

-

A Hebbian-like learning process: As the decision-making process or the skill is repeated by the 

agent multiple times, the automatization of the skill relies, in our framework, on the ability of 

the DP/cortex to imprint the link between a given sensory context and the optimal action to 

select. This can be performed with a simple Hebbian-like learning process that ensures that 

neuronal populations which are regularly coactivated reinforce their connections (see figure 

above), making their co-activation independent of any inputs from the rest of the brain. 

4. The automatization of skills

4.1. Distinct but complementary roles

The observations made in the previous section provide us with several clues regarding the respective 

roles of the BG and DP in decision making and more generally the execution and automatization of 

skills:

i) There is no evidence that the telencephalon plays a decisive role in the decision-making process 

itself. Indeed, organisms with smaller telencephala (such as toads or pigeons) are quite capable of 

making goal-oriented decisions (Herrnstein et al., 1989). They are also capable of learning, and 

demonstrate the same tradeoff between exploration and exploitation in the two-armed bandit task as 

the most advanced mammals (Bradshaw et al., 1979; Dougan et al., 1985; Gilbert-Norton et al., 2009; 

Graft et al., 1977; Herrnstein, 1974; Lau and Glimcher, 2008; Matthews and Temple, 1979; Morris et 

al., 2006; Palminteri et al., 2009; Pasquereau et al., 2007).

ii) It strongly suggests a correlation between the development of the telencephalon and the 

complexification of the ethogram. A larger DP/cortex brings a greater diversity in the scope of the 

decision, not necessarily an improvement of the decision-making process itself. This diversity can be 

expressed in several ways: by increasing the number of options available, by sequencing the possible 

answers, providing a decision tree that multiplies these options even more, or by providing new fields 

of application of the decision (Anderson, 1982; Boraud, 2015).

A Natural History of Skills

20

iii) The parallel emergence in mammals and birds of new structures of decision that are less sensitive 

to outcome (i.e. cortical columns for the former and pallial nuclei for the latter), and therefore allowed 

automatic procedures, conferred a significant evolutionary advantage.

4.2. A counter-intuitive hypothesis

Facing the vast amount of anatomical and electrophysiological data collected in various species of 

mammals and birds, we propose to rethink the evolution of skill learning and decision making as 

follows. In earlier vertebrates, the BG-thalamus loop and BG-brainstem loops drove most of the 

animal’s behaviors. Dopamine dependent striatal plasticity allowed the development of RL process. 

The system is fairly adaptable but cannot learn “fast” habitual reactions that shortcut the long and 

relatively slow BG loops. As the output neurons from the DP (pyramidal cells in mammals) increase 

their direct contact to the motor control systems in the brainstem or the spinal cord, this structure is 

able to take control progressively of more and more behaviors. In parallel, changes in the micro-

organization in mammals and birds, namely local inhibitory networks, allowed for the emergence of 

competition processes in the DP/cortical structures (see Box 1), which, associated with HL, allowed for 

the development of automatic skills.

Therefore, in the mammals and birds when it is necessary to learn new skills, RL processes in the BG 

train the DP/cortex that strengthen connections between sensory/associative and efferent neurons 

with HL processes in order to develop new skills that can be expressed autonomously later as proposed 

by Hellie, Ell and Ashby (2015). Many experimental data, thoroughly reviewed by these authors, 

support their theory in humans as well. It is tantalizing to link playing behavior to this capacity: playing 

allows for cortical skill learning that can be used thereafter to fight, flight, forage, hunt or interact 

socially. 

4.3. Compatibility with the alternative hypotheses 

The main alternative to our hypothesis stands that the development of habits is underlain by a 

progressive transfer from the associative loop to the sensorimotor one (Belin et al., 2009; Yin and 

Knowlton, 2006). As an example, a huge set of data in rats, monkeys and humans involved the 

A Natural History of Skills

21

associative striatum in flexible goal-directed behavior and the sensorimotor striatum in rigid habitual 

one (Le Masson et al., 2002; Lehericy et al., 2005; Miyachi et al., 2002; Poldrack et al., 2005). 

It has also been shown in rats that lesions of the associative striatum can make the transfer of control 

from the associative to the sensorimotor striatum faster (Yin et al., 2005). On the other hand devaluing 

the food reward in rats with lesions of the sensorimotor striatum, reduces lever-pressing rates even 

after extended training (Yin et al., 2004). It suggests that habits cannot develop when this territory is 

altered. 

However, many results are inconsistent with this hypothesis. In Parkinsonian patients, expression of 

learned skills is somehow conserved (Asmus et al., 2008). In primates, disconnecting the output of the 

basal ganglia from motor cortex doesn't disrupt the expression of automatic behaviors (Desmurget 

and Turner, 2010; Piron et al., 2016). Interestingly, these data have been demonstrated also in 

songbirds (Andalman and Fee, 2009) but not in rodents.

Can we incorporate these discrepancies in our evolutionary driven hypothesis? One possibility is that 

"the transfer of control from the associative striatum to the sensorimotor striatum is more accurately 

described as a switch from a ventral-based declarative memory system to a dorsal-based procedural 

memory one" (Helie et al., 2015). According to this hypothesis, "what is tested as goal-directed 

instrumental response recruits in fact networks involved in declarative memory tasks, whereas 

stimulus response association that is under the control of habit learning (i.e., which immediately 

precedes habitual behavior) depends on much the same circuitry as procedural learning" (Helie et al., 

2015; Khamassi and Humphries, 2012). It also suggests that evolution has segregated the dorsomedial 

striatum and the dorsolateral striatum into separate learning systems. If so, the results showing that 

activation in the associative striatum precedes activation in the sensorimotor one would reflect a faster 

dynamic of learning for the dorsomedial striatum than the dorsolateral one, rather than a sequential 

process. This segregation may be a unique feature of mammals as it has not been demonstrated yet 

in other species. 

Concerning the segregation between a subcortical system dedicated to "habitual" behavior and a 

frontal cortex dedicated to "deliberative" processes, it has been shifted recently under the influence 

of Machine Learning into a "Model-Free" vs "Model-Based" debate (Daw et al., 2006; Khamassi and 

Humphries, 2012). The BG are supposed to learn new associations by trial and error without prior 

assumptions while the cortex is able to generate representation of the world that allows it to compare 

each state to a predefined model onto which it can project the outcomes of future(s) action(s). In fact, 

we can reconcile this theory with ours by taking into account the fact that OFC and the ventral PFC, for 

example, receive massive inputs from the hippocampus that is involved in the building of 

A Natural History of Skills

22

representation of the world. These areas can merge thalamus mediated BG inputs and hippocampal 

information into neural representations of state dependent action(s).

4.4 The entanglement of two systems

To formalize our hypothesis, we proposed a theoretical model (Topalidou et al., submitted) that is an 

extension of previously published models (Guthrie et al., 2013; Leblois et al., 2006a; Topalidou et al., 

2015). This model is centered around a simple two-armed bandit task that aims to illustrate the main 

concepts we’ve introduced. Even though the task is a decision-making task, we believe the proposed 

architecture and the associated learning mechanisms are generic enough to be generalized to any 

other task that involves the basal ganglia-thalamus-cortex loop. 

4.5. Computational Approach

We provided previously an original model of action selection mechanism (Leblois et al., 2006b), which 

emerges from "the competition between a positive feedback through the direct pathway and a 

negative feedback through the hyperdirect pathway in the cortico-basal-thalamic loop". In order to 

explore the parallel organization of circuits in the BG, we then upgraded the model (Guthrie et al., 

2013) such as it includes all the major nuclei of the basal ganglia but GPe and is segregated into three 

loops (motor, associative and cognitive) that encompass also the cortex and the thalamus (Alexander 

and Crutcher, 1990b; Alexander et al., 1986). In this model, the cortex is modeled by a single layer of 

excitatory neurons. We realized that, although it reproduced fairly well the behavioral and 

electrophysiological signature of learning and choice in a two-armed bandit task, it could not account 

for the development of habits in primates (Desmurget and Turner, 2010; Piron et al., 2016). In fact, its 

architecture is closer to the decision-making network of early vertebrates, with an archaic pallium 

compared to that of mammals. To account for the development of cortex with its specific dynamic 

properties, we therefore incorporate a lateral competition mechanism in all three cortices (motor, 

cognitive, associative) based on short range excitation and long-range inhibition. We also added 

connections between the associative, cognitive and motor areas in order to allow crosstalk among 

these structures (Douglas and Martin, 2004). This competition process granted our cortical network 

with the capacity to make a decision by its own, although more slowly than when the BG are active 

(Figure 4).

A Natural History of Skills

23

In the early phase of learning, the system relies on intrinsic noise to select one of the options.

 The effect of phasic dopamine delivery on synaptic plasticity is modeled by a RL process at the level 

of cortico-striatal synapse in the cognitive territory of the network. Therefore, the decision made at 

the cognitive level can be used to bias the decision at the motor level. Once a motor action has been 

performed, HL modifies the connections between the cognitive cortex and the associative cortex. The 

latter process does not depend on reward but only on the choices. It is to be noted that the cortical 

selection, resulting from lateral competition in the cortex, needed more trials to be strong enough to 

bias a decision than the cortico-basal ganglia competition process such that the cortex is initially driven 

by the basal ganglia output (GPi), hence it learns from the statistics provided by the BG selection. 

Before the development of cortico-cortical connections, the level of noise induces some irregularity 

that match exploratory behaviors. It is also the behavior displayed by our earlier model devoid of a 

proper cortical layer (Guthrie et al., 2013) . Once the cortical learning has developed automatisms, the 

system is much less sensitive to noise and reaches almost 100% performances. An interesting 

prediction is therefore that lower-vertebrates such as lamprey or anamniote should be able to learn 

task by RL but should not be able to develop automatic skills.

A Natural History of Skills

24

Figure 4. Competition dynamic in the model. basal ganglia and the cortex. Solid lines represent 
activity related to the selected population, dashed lines represent activity related to the non-selected 
population. Decision threshold has been set to 40 spikes/s between the two cortical populations and 
is indicated on the x axis. Raster plots are related to the cortical populations and has been generated 
from the firing rate of 10 neurons. A) Activity in the motor populations in the absence of lateral 
competition in the cortical populations. B) Activity in the motor populations in the absence of the 
feedback from the basal ganglia (GPi) to the cortical populations via the thalamus. Decision threshold 
is reached thanks to the direct lateral competition in both cognitive and motor cortical channels. 
C) Activity in the motor populations in the full model with a dual competition, one cortical, one basal. 
When congruent (cortical and basal decision are the same), decision time for both the motor and 
cortical channels are faster than in the absence of one of the competition loop (from Topalidou et al., 
submitted).

A Natural History of Skills

25

6. Conclusion

We showed here that adopting a phylogenetic approach to the decision-making network helps to 

explain how it works in the species with the most complex brains, such as primates. In this taxonomic 

order, our conclusions are very close to the theory of the BG acting as "a general training machine for 

cortico-cortical connections" defended by Helie et al. (2015). However, we show that it accounts for a 

late phase of the evolution that appeared in parallel in mammals and birds and maybe some fishes 

that are able to develop automatic skills. In other species, subcortical loops drive most of the behavior 

and therefore even if they are capable of RL driven flexibility, they lack the capacity to develop strong 

automatic skills in order to optimize their performance.

The phylogenetic approach to understanding decision making is still in its infancy. We should gather 

information more comprehensively in lower vertebrates (fishes, amphibians, reptiles), mammals and 

birds in order to test our theory. For example, it has been demonstrated that salamanders, an 

amphibian with a brain architecture close to that of the lamprey, can be trained to perform a 

navigation task (Taylor and Adler, 1973). We just started an experimental study to test whether it 

relies on a classical DA dependent RL process and if we can operationalize habitual behavior in these 

species.

Incidentally, our theory provides a possible solution to an old conundrum concerning BG human 

pathology. In the classical view of the BG as a selection device (Mink, 1996), the effect of the 

inactivation of the STN or the GPi as a therapeutic approach to parkinsonism was paradoxical. But if 

we consider that such surgical treatment is practiced in a Parkinsonian patient old enough to have an 

over-trained cortex in the skills they use on a day-to-day basis, one can understand that it doesn’t need 

the subcortical feedback anymore. And indeed, some experimental and clinical data have been 

gathered showing that in those patients learning of new skills is disrupted (Jahanshahi et al., 2014; 

Wilkinson et al., 2009).

We may also help to modify theories on addictions. Those disorders are often considered as “bad 

cognitive habits”. They were considered hitherto as subcortical disorders. But according to our theory, 

they should rely on abnormal cortical processes. Recent published work seems to support this 

hypothesis. Guillem and Ahmed (2017) showed an abnormal ratio of neurons encoding for an addictive 

A Natural History of Skills

26

substance in the OFC, but it will need more experimental evidence. It is nevertheless a stimulating 

thread to follow.

Finally, our theory provides an anatomical support to the think fast-think slow theory developed by 

Kahneman (2011). He proposed that human decision making is the result of a competition between a 

fast, automatic system that is prone to make mistakes and a slower, more demanding system that is 

more reliable. Kahneman himself never identified a neuroanatomical substrate of his theory, but 

many others have tried to put it in parallel with a triune brain organization: the fast system being 

associated to the “reptilian brain”, while the slow one is identified as a product of the “neo-mammalian 

cortex” (Crosby, 2015). In fact, our proposition takes the opposite line. According to us, the slow 

system is the older RL dependent cortico-subcortical loop, while the fast one results from cortical 

Hebbian associations. It implies that shortcuts (heuristics) rely on cortical processes while difficult 

decisions and actions relying on emotional and moral motivation rather stand on a subcortical 

substrate. It brings a fresh view to the psychology of decision making and may help to unravel the 

neural correlates of cognitive bias.

 Acknowledgement

We thank David Hansel and Frederic Alexandre for early discussion about the paper and David J. Perkel 

and Erwan Bezard for helpful comments on the present manuscript. 

A Natural History of Skills

Bibliography

27

Adesnik, H., Scanziani, M., 2010. Lateral competition for cortical space by layer-specific 
horizontal circuits. Nature 464, 1155-1160.

Albin, R.L., Young, A.B., Penney, J.B., 1989. The functional anatomy of basal ganglia disorders. 
Trends Neurosci. 12, 366-375.

Alexander, G.A., Crutcher, M.D., 1990a. Preparation for movement: neural representations of 
intended direction in three motor areas of the monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 64, 133-150.

Alexander, G.E., Crutcher, M.D., 1990b. Functional architecture of basal ganglia circuits: neural 
substrates of parallel processing. Trends Neurosci. 13, 266-271.

Alexander, G.E., DeLong, M.R., Strick, P.L., 1986. Parallel organization of functionally 
segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 357-381.

Andalman, A.S., Fee, M.S., 2009. A basal ganglia-forebrain circuit in the songbird biases motor 
output to avoid vocal errors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 106, 12518-12523.

Anderson, J.R., 1982. Acquisiton of cognitive skill. Psychological review 89, 369-403.

Apicella, P., Scarnati, E., Ljungberg, T., Schultz, W., 1992. Neuronal activity in monkey striatum 
related to the expectation of predictable environmental events. J. Neurophysiol. 68, 945-960.

Asmus, F., Huber, H., Gasser, T., Schols, L., 2008. Kick and rush: paradoxical kinesia in Parkinson 
disease. Neurology 71, 695.

Balleine, B., Dickinson, A., 1992. Signalling and incentive processes in instrumental reinforcer 
devaluation. The Quarterly journal of experimental psychology. B, Comparative and 
physiological psychology 45, 285-301.

Balleine, B.W., O'Doherty, J.P., 2010. Human and rodent homologies in action control: 
corticostriatal determinants of goal-directed and habitual action. Neuropsychopharmacology 
: official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 48-69.

Bartus, R.T., Levere, T.E., 1977. Frontal decortication in rhesus monkeys: a test of the 
interference hypothesis. Brain research 119, 233-248.

Bekoff, M., Byers, J.A., Bekoff, A., 1980. Prenatal motility and postnatal play: functional 
continuity? Developmental psychobiology 13, 225-228.

Belin, D., Jonkman, S., Dickinson, A., Robbins, T.W., Everitt, B.J., 2009. Parallel and interactive 
learning processes within the basal ganglia: relevance for the understanding of addiction. 
Behavioural brain research 199, 89-102.

A Natural History of Skills

28

Bird, C.D., Emery, N.J., 2009a. Insightful problem solving and creative tool modification by 
captive nontool-using rooks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 106, 10370-10375.

Bird, C.D., Emery, N.J., 2009b. Rooks use stones to raise the water level to reach a floating 
worm. Current biology : CB 19, 1410-1414.

Bjursten, L.M., Norrsell, K., Norrsell, U., 1976. Behavioural repertory of cats without cerebral 
cortex 
research. Experimentelle Hirnforschung. 
Experimentation cerebrale 25, 115-130.

infancy. Experimental brain 

from 

Boraud, T., 2015. Matière à décision. CNRS éditions: Paris.

Bottjer, S.W., Halsema, K.A., Brown, S.A., Miesner, E.A., 1989. Axonal connections of a 
forebrain nucleus involved with vocal learning in zebra finches. The Journal of comparative 
neurology 279, 312-326.

Bradshaw, C.M., Szabadi, E., Bevan, P., Ruddle, H.V., 1979. The effect of signaled 
reinforcement availability on concurrent performances in humans. J Exp Anal Behav 32, 65-
74.

Brumm, H., Zollinger, S.A., 2017. Vocal plasticity in a reptile. Proceedings. Biological sciences / 
The Royal Society 284.

Cerutti, S.M., Ferrari, E.A., 1995. Operant discrimination learning in detelencephalated 
pigeons (Columba livia). Brazilian journal of medical and biological research = Revista 
brasileira de pesquisas medicas e biologicas 28, 1089-1095.

Cnotka, J., Gunturkun, O., Rehkamper, G., Gray, R.D., Hunt, G.R., 2008. Extraordinary large 
brains in tool-using New Caledonian crows (Corvus moneduloides). Neuroscience letters 433, 
241-245.

Crook, J.H., 1965. The adaptive significance of avian social organisations. Symp. zool. Soc. 
Lond. 14, 181-218.

Crosby, G., 2015. Fight, Flight, Freeze : Taming Your Reptilian Brain and Other Practical 
Approaches to Self-Improvement. Crosbyod Publishing.

Daw, N.D., Niv, Y., Dayan, P., 2005. Uncertainty-based competition between prefrontal and 
dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control. Nature neuroscience 8, 1704-1711.

Daw, N.D., O'Doherty, J.P., Dayan, P., Seymour, B., Dolan, R.J., 2006. Cortical substrates for 
exploratory decisions in humans. Nature 441, 876-879.

Desmurget, M., Turner, R.S., 2008. Testing basal ganglia motor functions through reversible 
inactivations in the posterior internal globus pallidus. Journal of neurophysiology 99, 1057-
1076.

Desmurget, M., Turner, R.S., 2010. Motor Sequences and the Basal Ganglia: Kinematics, Not 
Habits. J. Neurosci. 30, 7685-7690.

A Natural History of Skills

29

Diamond, J., Bond, A.B., 2003. A Comparative Analysis of Social Play in Birds. Behaviour 140, 
1091-1115.

Dickinson, A., 1985. Actions and Habits: The Development of Behavioural Autonomy. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B, Biological Sciences 308, 67.

Dougan, J.D., McSweeney, F.K., Farmer, V.A., 1985. Some parameters of behavioral contrast 
and allocation of interim behavior in rats. J Exp Anal Behav 44, 325-335.

Douglas, R.J., Martin, K.A., 2004. Neuronal circuits of the neocortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 27, 
419-451.

Emery, N.J., 2006. Cognitive ornithology: the evolution of avian intelligence. Philosophical 
transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 361, 23-43.

Fee, M.S., Goldberg, J.H., 2011. A hypothesis for basal ganglia-dependent reinforcement 
learning in the songbird. Neuroscience 198, 152-170.

Finkenstadt, T. 1989. Visual associative learning: Searching for behaviorally relevant brain 
structures in toads. In: Visuomotor coordination. pp. 799-832. Eds. J.P. Ewert, M.A. Arbib. 
Plenum Press: New York.

Fiorillo, C.D., Tobler, P.N., Schultz, W., 2003. Discrete coding of reward probability and 
uncertainty by dopamine neurons. Science 299, 1898-1902.

Fitts, P. 1964. Perceptual-motor skill learning. In: Categories of human learning. pp. 243-285. 
Ed. A. Melton. Academic Press: New York.

Gilbert-Norton, L.B., Shahan, T.A., Shivik, J.A., 2009. Coyotes (Canis latrans) and the matching 
law. Behavioural processes 82, 178-183.

Graft, D.A., Lea, S.E., Whitworth, T.L., 1977. The matching law in and within groups of rats. J 
Exp Anal Behav 27, 183-194.

Graybiel, A.M., 1998. The basal ganglia and chunking of action repertoires. Neurobiol Learn 
Mem 70, 119-136.

Graybiel, A.M., 2008. Habits, rituals, and the evaluative brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 31, 359-387.

Grillner, S., Robertson, B., Stephenson-Jones, M., 2013. The evolutionary origin of the 
vertebrate basal ganglia and its role in action selection. The Journal of physiology 591, 5425-
5431.

Guillem, K., Ahmed, S.H., 2017. Preference for Cocaine is Represented in the Orbitofrontal 
Cortex by an Increased Proportion of Cocaine Use-Coding Neurons. Cereb Cortex.

Gunturkun, O., 2012. The convergent evolution of neural substrates for cognition. Psychol Res 
76, 212-219.

A Natural History of Skills

30

Guthrie, M., Leblois, A., Garenne, A., Boraud, T., 2013. Interaction between cognitive and 
motor cortico-basal ganglia loops during decision making: a computational study. Journal of 
neurophysiology 109, 3025-3040.

Helie, S., Ell, S.W., Ashby, F.G., 2015. Learning robust cortico-cortical associations with the 
basal ganglia: an integrative review. Cortex; a journal devoted to the study of the nervous 
system and behavior 64, 123-135.

Herculano-Houzel, S., 2011a. Brains matter, bodies maybe not: the case for examining neuron 
numbers irrespective of body size. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1225, 191-
199.

Herculano-Houzel, S., 2011b. Not all brains are made the same: new views on brain scaling in 
evolution. Brain, behavior and evolution 78, 22-36.

Herculano-Houzel, S., Mota, B., Lent, R., 2006. Cellular scaling rules for rodent brains. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103, 12138-
12143.

Herrnstein, R.J., 1974. Formal properties of the matching law. J Exp Anal Behav 21, 159-164.

Herrnstein, R.J., Vaughan, W., Jr., Mumford, D.B., Kosslyn, S.M., 1989. Teaching pigeons an 
abstract relational rule: insideness. Perception & psychophysics 46, 56-64.

Hodos, W., Butler, A.B., 1997. Evolution of sensory pathways in vertebrates. Brain, behavior 
and evolution 50, 189-197.

Horton, J.C., Adams, D.L., 2005. The cortical column: a structure without a function. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 360, 837.

Houk, J.C., Wise, S.P., 1995. Distributed modular architectures linking basal ganglia, 
cerebellum, and cerebral cortex: their role in planning and controlling action. Cereb Cortex 5, 
95-110.

Jahanshahi, M., Obeso, I., Baunez, C., Alegre, M., Krack, P., 2014. Parkinson's Disease, the 
Subthalamic Nucleus, Inhibition, and Impulsivity. Movement disorders : official journal of the 
Movement Disorder Society.

Jaldow, E.J., Oakley, D.A., Davey, G.C., 1989. Performance of Decorticated Rats on Fixed 
Interval and Fixed Time Schedules. The European journal of neuroscience 1, 461-470.

Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, fast and slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux: New York.

Kawase, H., Okata, Y., Ito, K., 2013. Role of huge geometric circular structures in the 
reproduction of a marine pufferfish. Sci Rep 3, 2106.

Keysers, C., Perrett, D.I., 2004. Demystifying social cognition: a Hebbian perspective. Trends in 
cognitive sciences 8, 501-507.

A Natural History of Skills

31

Khamassi, M., Humphries, M.D., 2012. Integrating cortico-limbic-basal ganglia architectures 
for learning model-based and model-free navigation strategies. Frontiers in behavioral 
neuroscience 6, 79.

Kukleta, M., Libouban, S., 1967. [Acquisition of instrumental conditioning in functionally 
decorticated rats]. Journal de physiologie 59, 442.

Lau, B., Glimcher, P.W., 2008. Value representations in the primate striatum during matching 
behavior. Neuron 58, 451-463.

Le Masson, G., Renaud-Le Masson, S., Debay, D., Bal, T., 2002. Feedback inhibition controls 
spike transfer in hybrid thalamic circuits. Nature 417, 854-858.

Leblois, A., Boraud, T., Meissner, W., Bergman, H., Hansel, D., 2006a. Competition between 
feedback loops underlies normal and pathological dynamics in the basal ganglia. The Journal 
of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 26, 3567-3583.

Leblois, A., Meissner, W., Bezard, E., Bioulac, B., Gross, C.E., Boraud, T., 2006b. Temporal and 
spatial alterations in GPi neuronal encoding might contribute to slow down movement in 
parkinsonian monkeys. The European journal of neuroscience 24, 1201-1208.

Lehericy, S., Benali, H., Van de Moortele, P.F., Pelegrini-Issac, M., Waechter, T., Ugurbil, K., 
Doyon, J., 2005. Distinct basal ganglia territories are engaged in early and advanced motor 
sequence learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 102, 12566-12571.

Lemon, R.N., Griffiths, J., 2005. Comparing the function of the corticospinal system in different 
species: organizational differences for motor specialization? Muscle Nerve 32, 261-279.

Logan, C.J., Jelbert, S.A., Breen, A.J., Gray, R.D., Taylor, A.H., 2014. Modifications to the 
Aesop's Fable Paradigm Change New Caledonian Crow Performances. PloS one 9, e103049.

MacLean, P.D., 1973. An evolutionary approach to the investigation of psychoneuro-endocrine 
functions. Plenum Press: New York,.

Mallet, N., Micklem, B.R., Henny, P., Brown, M.T., Williams, C., Bolam, J.P., Nakamura, K.C., 
Magill, P.J., 2012. Dichotomous organization of the external globus pallidus. Neuron 74, 1075-
1086.

Mallet, N., Schmidt, R., Leventhal, D., Chen, F., Amer, N., Boraud, T., Berke, Joshua D., 
Arkypallidal Cells Send a Stop Signal to Striatum. Neuron 89, 308-316.

Matthews, L.R., Temple, W., 1979. Concurrent schedule assessment of food preference in 
cows. J Exp Anal Behav 32, 245-254.

Mink, J.W., 1996. The basal ganglia: focused selection and inhibition of competing motor 
programs. Prog. Neurobiol. 50, 381-425.

A Natural History of Skills

32

Miyachi, S., Hikosaka, O., Lu, X., 2002. Differential activation of monkey striatal neurons in the 
early and late stages of procedural learning. Experimental brain research. Experimentelle 
Hirnforschung. Experimentation cerebrale 146, 122-126.

Mooney, R., 1995. Behavioral learning. The illuminated songbird. Current biology : CB 5, 609-
611.

Morris, G., Nevet, A., Arkadir, D., Vaadia, E., Bergman, H., 2006. Midbrain dopamine neurons 
encode decisions for future action. Nature neuroscience 9, 1057-1063.

Nambu, A., Tokuno, H., Hamada, I., Kita, H., Imanishi, M., Akazawa, T., Ikeuchi, Y., Hasegawa, 
N., 2000. Excitatory cortical inputs to pallidal neurons via the subthalamic nucleus in the 
monkey. Journal of neurophysiology 84, 289-300.

Nambu, A., Tokuno, H., Takada, M., 2002. Functional significance of the cortico-subthalamo-
pallidal 'hyperdirect' pathway. Neurosci Res 43, 111-117.

Nottebohm, F., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Cynx, J., Kirn, J., Ling, C.Y., Nottebohm, M., Suter, R., Tolles, 
A., Williams, H., 1990. Song learning in birds: the relation between perception and production. 
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences 329, 
115-124.

O'Connell, L.A., Hofmann, H.A., 2011. The vertebrate mesolimbic reward system and social 
behavior network: a comparative synthesis. The Journal of comparative neurology 519, 3599-
3639.

O'Reilly, R.C., Frank, M.J., 2006. Making working memory work: a computational model of 
learning in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Neural computation 18, 283-328.

Oakley, D.A., 1981. Performance of decorticated rats in a two-choice visual discrimination 
apparatus. Behavioural brain research 3, 55-69.

Ocana, F.M., Suryanarayana, S.M., Saitoh, K., Kardamakis, A.A., Capantini, L., Robertson, B., 
Grillner, S., 2015. The lamprey pallium provides a blueprint of the mammalian motor 
projections from cortex. Current biology : CB 25, 413-423.

Palminteri, S., Boraud, T., Lafargue, G., Dubois, B., Pessiglione, M., 2009. Brain hemispheres 
selectively track the expected value of contralateral options. The Journal of neuroscience : the 
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 29, 13465-13472.

Parent, A., Hazrati, L.-N., 1995a. Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia. I. The cortico-basal 
ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop. Brain Res. Rev. 20, 91-127.

Parent, A., Hazrati, L.-N., 1995b. Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia. II. The place of 
subthalamic nucleus and external pallidum in basal ganglia circuitry. Brain Res. Rev. 20, 128-
154.

Pasquereau, B., Nadjar, A., Arkadir, D., Bezard, E., Goillandeau, M., Bioulac, B., Gross, C.E., 
Boraud, T., 2007. Shaping of motor responses by incentive values through the basal ganglia. 
The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 27, 1176-1183.

A Natural History of Skills

33

Pasupathy, A., Miller, E.K., 2005. Different time courses of learning-related activity in the 
prefrontal cortex and striatum. Nature 433, 873-876.

Patton, B.W., Braithwaite, V.A., 2015. Changing tides: ecological and historical perspectives 
on fish cognition. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Cogn Sci 6, 159-176.

Patton, P., Grobstein, P., 1998. The effects of telencephalic lesions on visually mediated prey 
orienting behavior in the leopard frog (Rana pipiens). I. The effects of complete removal of 
one telencephalic lobe, with a comparison to the effects of unilateral tectal lobe lesions. Brain, 
behavior and evolution 51, 123-143.

Pfenning, A.R., Hara, E., Whitney, O., Rivas, M.V., Wang, R., Roulhac, P.L., Howard, J.T., 
Wirthlin, M., Lovell, P.V., Ganapathy, G., Mouncastle, J., Moseley, M.A., Thompson, J.W., 
Soderblom, E.J., Iriki, A., Kato, M., Gilbert, M.T., Zhang, G., Bakken, T., Bongaarts, A., Bernard, 
A., Lein, E., Mello, C.V., Hartemink, A.J., Jarvis, E.D., 2014. Convergent transcriptional 
specializations in the brains of humans and song-learning birds. Science 346, 1256846.

Piron, C., Kase, D., Topalidou, M., Goillandeau, M., Orignac, H., N'Guyen, T.H., Rougier, N., 
Boraud, T., 2016. The globus pallidus pars interna in goal-oriented and routine behaviors: 
Resolving a long-standing paradox. Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement 
Disorder Society 31, 1146-1154.

Poldrack, R.A., Sabb, F.W., Foerde, K., Tom, S.M., Asarnow, R.F., Bookheimer, S.Y., Knowlton, 
B.J., 2005. The neural correlates of motor skill automaticity. The Journal of neuroscience : the 
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 25, 5356-5364.

Pombal, M.A., Megias, M., Bardet, S.M., Puelles, L., 2009. New and old thoughts on the 
segmental organization of the forebrain in lampreys. Brain, behavior and evolution 74, 7-19.

Pombal, M.A., Puelles, L., 1999. Prosomeric map of the lamprey forebrain based on calretinin 
immunocytochemistry, Nissl stain, and ancillary markers. The Journal of comparative 
neurology 414, 391-422.

Prior, H., Schwarz, A., Gunturkun, O., 2008. Mirror-induced behavior in the magpie (Pica pica): 
evidence of self-recognition. PLoS biology 6, e202.

Puelles, L., Kuwana, E., Puelles, E., Bulfone, A., Shimamura, K., Keleher, J., Smiga, S., 
Rubenstein, J.L., 2000. Pallial and subpallial derivatives in the embryonic chick and mouse 
telencephalon, traced by the expression of the genes Dlx-2, Emx-1, Nkx-2.1, Pax-6, and Tbr-1. 
The Journal of comparative neurology 424, 409-438.

Reiner, A., Perkel, D.J., Mello, C.V., Jarvis, E.D., 2004. Songbirds and the revised avian brain 
nomenclature. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1016, 77-108.

Samejima, K., Doya, K., 2007. Multiple representations of belief states and action values in 
corticobasal ganglia loops. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1104, 213-228.

A Natural History of Skills

34

Scharff, C., Nottebohm, F., 1991. A comparative study of the behavioral deficits following 
lesions of various parts of the zebra finch song system: implications for vocal learning. The 
Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 11, 2896-2913.

Schultz, W., 1992. Activity of dopamine neurons in the behaving primate. Seminars in the 
neurosciences 4, 129-138.

Schultz, W., 2006. Behavioral theories and the neurophysiology of reward. Annu Rev Psychol 
57, 87-115.

Schultz, W., Dayan, P., Montague, P.R., 1997. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. 
Science 275, 1593-1599.

Seger, C.A., Spiering, B.J., 2011. A critical review of habit learning and the Basal Ganglia. 
Frontiers in systems neuroscience 5, 66.

Silberberg, G., Bolam, J.P., 2015. Local and afferent synaptic pathways in the striatal 
microcircuitry. Current opinion in neurobiology 33, 182-187.

Song, S., Miller, K.D., Abbott, L.F., 2000. Competitive Hebbian learning through spike-timing-
dependent synaptic plasticity. Nature neuroscience 3, 919-926.

Stephenson-Jones, M., Ericsson, J., Robertson, B., Grillner, S., 2012. Evolution of the basal 
ganglia: dual-output pathways conserved throughout vertebrate phylogeny. The Journal of 
comparative neurology 520, 2957-2973.

Striedter, G.F., 2005. Principles of brain evolution. Sinauer Associates: Sunderland, Mass.

Taylor, D.H., Adler, K., 1973. Spatial orientation by Salamanders using plane-polarized light. 
Science 181, 285-287.

Tchernichovski, O., Marcus, G., 2014. Vocal learning beyond imitation: mechanisms of 
adaptive vocal development in songbirds and human infants. Current opinion in neurobiology 
28c, 42-47.

Topalidou, M., Kase, D., Boraud, T., Rougier, N., submitted. Dual Competition between the 
Basal Ganglia and the Cortex: from Action-Outcome to Stimulus-Response.

Topalidou, M., Leblois, A., Boraud, T., Rougier, N.P., 2015. A long journey into reproducible 
computational neuroscience. Frontiers in computational neuroscience 9, 30.

Travis, A.M., Woolsey, C.N., 1956. MOTOR PERFORMANCE OP MONKEYS AFTER BILATERAL 
PARTIAL AND TOTAL CEREBRAL DECORTICATIONS. American Journal of Physical Medicine & 
Rehabilitation 35.

Turner, R.S., Desmurget, M., 2010. Basal ganglia contributions to motor control: a vigorous 
tutor. Current opinion in neurobiology 20, 704-716.

Vernier, P. 2017. The Brain of Teleos Fishes. In: Evolution of the Nervous System. pp. 59-76. 
Ed. J.H. Kaas. Academic Press: London.

A Natural History of Skills

35

Warren, T.L., Tumer, E.C., Charlesworth, J.D., Brainard, M.S., 2011. Mechanisms and time 
course of vocal learning and consolidation in the adult songbird. Journal of neurophysiology 
106, 1806-1821.

Whishaw, I.Q., Schallert, T., Kolb, B., 1981. An analysis of feeding and sensorimotor abilities of 
rats after decortication. J Comp Physiol Psychol 95, 85-103.

Wilkinson, L., Khan, Z., Jahanshahi, M., 2009. The role of the basal ganglia and its cortical 
connections in sequence learning: evidence from implicit and explicit sequence learning in 
Parkinson's disease. Neuropsychologia 47, 2564-2573.

Willemet, R., 2013. Reconsidering the evolution of brain, cognition, and behavior in birds and 
mammals. Frontiers in psychology 4, 396.

Wullimann, M.F., Vernier, P. 2007. Evolution of the Nervous System in Fishes In: Evolution of 
Nervous Systems. pp. 39-60. Ed. J.H. Kaas. Academic Press: Oxford.

Yin, H.H., Knowlton, B.J., 2006. The role of the basal ganglia in habit formation. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 7, 464-476.

Yin, H.H., Knowlton, B.J., Balleine, B.W., 2004. Lesions of dorsolateral striatum preserve 
outcome expectancy but disrupt habit formation in instrumental learning. The European 
journal of neuroscience 19, 181-189.

Yin, H.H., Ostlund, S.B., Knowlton, B.J., Balleine, B.W., 2005. The role of the dorsomedial 
striatum in instrumental conditioning. The European journal of neuroscience 22, 513-523.

Abbreviations

ACC: anterior cingulate cortex
BG: basal ganglia
CBG: cortex-basal ganglia (loop)
DA: dopamine
DP: dorsal pallium
GABA: gamma-aminobutyric acid
GPe: external segment of the globus pallidus
GPi: internal segment of the globus pallidus
HL: Hebbian learning
MC: motor cortex
MLR: mesencephalic locomotor region
MSN: medium spiny neurons
OFC: orbitofrontal cortex
PFC: prefrontal cortex
PMC: premotor cortex
RL: reinforcement learning
SNr: substancia nigra pars reticulata
STN: subthalamic nucleus
VTA: ventral tegmental area

