Towards computational learning science: modeling creative problem
solving in child-robot interaction through behavioral learning analytics
Margarida Romero, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Frédéric Alexandre. Towards computational learning
science: modeling creative problem solving in child-robot interaction
through behavioral learning analytics. ISLS 2023 - Annual Meeting of the
International Society of the Learning Sciences, Jun 2023, Montréal,
Canada. ￿hal- 04124474￿

HAL Id: hal-04124474

https://hal.science/hal-04124474

Submitted on 10 Jun 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial -
ShareAlike 4.0 International License

Towards computational learning science: modeling creative problem
solving in child-robot interaction through behavioral learning analytics

Margarida Romero 1,2*, Frédéric Alexandre 2

* margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr / https://margaridaromero.blog/ 1.
LINE & NeuroMod, Université Côte d’Azur, France 2. Mnemosyne Inria Team,
France

#CreaCube Big data corpus of creative problem-solving tasks (n>1300
experiments). Each video is coded based on a behavioral learning
analytics coding schema

In computational neuroscience and bioinspired artificial intelligence
(AI), different studies aim at understanding the mechanisms of
perception such as shape recognition and sensori-motor coordination such
as grasping or pinching. A step further, as in the Mnemosyne research
program, cognitive mechanisms are analyzed to better understand brain
circuits responsible for reasoning and problem-solving by a biological
or algorithmic agent.

We engage the participants in an ill-defined problem-solving task whose
goal requires them to explore the four unknown cubes placed in front of
them. The affordances are important in the process of understanding the
material and its features to configure it in a way to solve the problem
(the goal state).

Goal : “Build a vehicle moving from a red point to a black point”

The ANR CreaMaker and AIDE projects aim to better understand creative
problem solving by analyzing the interaction between brain processes and
problem-solving activity from a behavioral perspective. The CPS behavior
(intentions + CPS regulation) is analyzed based on learning analytics
generated automatically and also through human analysis of this activity
based on coding schemes.

#CreaComp is a research program in computational learning sciences for
the advancement of the study of creative problem solving.

Levels of analysis of creativity (Romero, 2022) based on Lodge et
al. (2017)

CPS regulation (Romero, 2022)

MSc SmartEdTech is an international master’s program in edtech.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Devoted to Education (AIDE) is an INRIA
exploratory action aiming to advance the study of problem solving from a
computational learning sciences perspective.

IDEX UCAJedi for Ukrainian researchers. Collaboration with
Prof. Strutynska to evaluate wartime stress CPS, including learners in
Kyiv and Ukrainian refugees in France.

The Horizon AugMENTOR project adopts augmented intelligence to develop
collaborative learning paths.

The GTnum #Scol_ia aims to advance the study of teachers’ and learners’
digital competencies required in the AI era.

The ANR CreaMaker project aims to advance the study of individual and
collective creative problem solving through educational robotics.

Six levels of creative engagement in AI in Education (#PPai6)

2023 @MargaridaRomero, @SylvieBarma, @SimonDuguay3, @isaac_guillaume,
@cduret, @LochrisH & @Viv_LllLake


