Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged
and unplugged mode
Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville, Marie Duflot-Kremer

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Thierry Viéville, Marie Duflot-Kremer. Activity for learning computational think-
ing in plugged and unplugged mode. [Research Report] 006, UCA - INSPE Académie de Nice. 2022.
￿hal-03793719￿

HAL Id: hal-03793719

https://hal.science/hal-03793719

Submitted on 3 Oct 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged and unplugged mode.

Margarida Romero

1
 , Thierry Viéville
3

2
,

Marie Duflot-Kremer

MSc SmartEdtech Program

Research Report N°006 — October 2022 —15 pages.

Abstract: The introduction of computing into schools can drive the development of computational thinking along with 

associated problem-solving skills. In this context we look at the different types of activities used to learn computing, with 

the aim of establishing a protocol to compare plugged and unplugged activities at school, and more specifically to see 

how effectively unplugged activities can be used for skills transfer in order to learn computing.

 Key-words: Unplugged activity, Pedagogical robotics, Computational thinkink

1

2

3

 LINE laboratory – Margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr

 Inria Mnemosyne team & LINE laboratory – thierry.vieville@inria.fr

LORIA – marie.duflot-kremer@loria.fr

Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged and unplugged mode.

3

1. Introduction 

There has been a major upheaval in the way computing is learned in schools in the last few decades 

(Baron & Bruillard, 2013). In recent years, learning computing has gained in popularity in schools, 

partly because of the accessibility of visual programming tools like Scratch (Resnick et al., 2009) and 

partly because of increasing awareness of the need to understand and demystify digital technology so 

that citizens can develop a critical and creative approach to digital issues. Computing has already 

begun to be incorporated into official curricula in France, England, Canadian provinces such as British 

Colombia, and many other countries (Heintz, Mannila, & Färnqvist, 2016). We can assume that to 

understand digital technology, you need to be familiar with some of its principles, uses, and 

challenges. Rather than just seeing digital as a set of technical and procedural knowledge, Wing 

(2006) proposes the concept of computational thinking as the ability to use computing methods and 

concepts to solve problems. The concept of computational thinking draws on problem-solving 

strategies in a number of fields. Since the concept of computational thinking was first proposed, 

numerous studies have been conducted to conceptualize and evaluate it in the context of different 

activities for learning programming (Grover & Pea, 2013). The development of computational thinking 

can lead to the discovery of new concepts such as those related to algorithms or the coding of 

information. When they set up activities for learning to program, teachers’ first thought is often about 

what they need in terms of computer equipment (Romero & Netto, 2018). But do we really need a 

computer to start to develop computational thinking? The answer to this question turns out not to be 

straightforward; unplugged activities that transpose computing concepts into the handling of everyday 

objects and the movement of the learners have proved very promising. In this study, we present a 

protocol for studying computational thinking in a context where programming is learned using 

unplugged activities and using the Scratch visual programming software. Scratch was chosen 

because of its international popularity in primary education (Lye & Koh, 2014).

2

Learning to program using unplugged activities 

2.0 Learning with unplugged computing activities.

It is often said that we should limit screen time (Saunders & Vallance, 2017), avoid digital passivity 

(Karsenti, 2018), and develop critical thinking about the digital world. In the context of learning to 

program, the use of software such as Scratch or connected objects or robots is often discussed (Misirli 

& Komis, 2014); however, another paradigm exists in which neither hardware nor software are 

required: unplugged computing (Bell, Alexander, Freeman, & Grimley, 2009; Bell, Witten, & Fellows, 

1998). During unplugged or computerless activities, children learn, through play during ‘unplugged’ 

activities, the concepts at the heart of computing in general or robotics in particular. With these 

N° 9999

4

 Romero & Viéville & Duflot-Kremer

activities it is possible, for example, to learn what an algorithm is, or how to encode and transmit a 

piece of information. They approach computational thinking (Wing, 2011) as a way of solving 

problems, in which computers are not the end in themselves; the learners can take a step back, 

embodying (Tsarava et al., 2017) their learning through activities involving movement. This approach 

to learning computing is also consistent with a disregard for technophilia and technophobia as 

opposing binary positions. Instead it aims to develop a sociocritical approach through which the 

learner and citizen develops a critical and creative relationship with digital technology, appropriating 

the concepts and processes of computational thinking with their entire mind and body. Various studies 

of educational robotics (Highfield, Mulligan, & Hedberg, 2008; Misirli & Komis, 2016) thus show the 

value of the human/robot spatial relationship as a way of developing spatial awareness. 

More than twenty years ago, researchers in New Zealand (Bell et al., 1998) set up a programme for 

teaching the basics of computing without a computer. Their ‘CS Unplugged’ document (L’informatique 

4
sans ordinateur

 in French) clearly explains the philosophy behind this approach and suggests a 

whole range of activities for pupils from primary school age upwards. The positive impact of these 

activities was studied by Brackmann and his colleagues (2017) on two classes with a control group; 

they observed a statistically significant improvement in the children’s performance in computational 

thinking, for example, breaking down problems into subproblems, and creating algorithms.

Unplugged computing activities have the advantage first and foremost of not requiring costly 

equipment or the skills to operate it (Curzon, Dorling, Ng, Selby, & Woollard, 2014). But this major 

advantage in terms of viability and accessibility is not enough unless the activities also, above all, 

have great educational potential as a different way of learning computing concepts and processes. In 

this article we analyze these activities from the point of view of embodied cognition (Wilson, 2002), a 

way of learning with the body in a particular context. We will finish by discussing the play experience 

given by unplugged learning activities. 

4

 https://interstices.info/upload/csunplugged/CSUnplugged\_fr.pdf 

MSc SmartEdtech - LINE

Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged and unplugged mode.

5

2.1

Learning creative programming 

The effects of programming activities on the development of computing concepts and processes need 

to be examined on various levels. Learning programming procedurally means learning a certain 

sequence of instructions, but does not guarantee the development of computational thinking (Romero, 

Noirpoudre, & Viéville, 2018). By aiming for more than simply teaching children to program, for 

example by using unplugged activities or by directing activity towards learning computational thinking, 

it is possible to achieve genuine positive effects at primary and early secondary level, even with newly 

qualified teachers (Moreno-León & Robles, 2015). What makes the difference is moving from learning 

programming procedurally to integrating creative programming in an interdisciplinary way (Resnick & 

Siegal, 2015; Romero, 2016). What counts is not simply learning programming, but instead finding 

ways of learning through programming that can develop computational learning. The procedural 

approach engages the pupil in a programming sequence where the parameters are set by the teacher, 

whereas the creative approach gives the pupil room for creativity in terms of both the procedure and 

the product created (Romero, 2016). The value of developing activities for learning programming that 

aim to develop computational thinking is well established in various studies (Grover & Pea, 2013), in 

which the authors report positive effects on, for example, problem-solving ability (as defined by Torp, 

2002) and, to a lesser extent, reasoning and spatial awareness. These results were achieved with 

groups of university students (i.e. future teachers) and also secondary pupils. A bibliography review of 

various studies about learning computing is available online through the Class’Code project (Romero 

et al., 2018). 

2.2

Unplugged computing: a range of different educational approaches 

In view of the emergence and diversity of activities directed at learning computing in schools, a 

growing number of studies have looked at the value and effectiveness of these different approaches. 

Computing can be learned using computer equipment, but also through unplugged activities that use 

computing concepts and processes; from Bell, Witten and Fellows (1998) to Duflot (2016), there is a 

wide range of different unplugged activities. Some unplugged activities are very procedural: a set of 

instructions is provided that the pupils have to follow. Other activities take the form of a ‘magic trick’, 

typically a card trick where the explanation is based on an algorithm that is impossible to guess and 

can only be discovered when a ‘hint’ is given. Neither of these two extremes is ideal. Our experience 

is that it is better to offer a research activity with attainable milestones, as was done following a large-

scale trial by Calmet, Hirtzig and Wilgenbus (2016). Starting with long explanations that need to be 

retained should also be avoided, and the participants’ situation should be explained immediately: one 

person is the robot, stands up and gets into position, and the other is the programmer and gives the 

instructions; the activity is revealed as the action progresses. A low-level mode is often chosen for the 

N° 9999

6

 Romero & Viéville & Duflot-Kremer

start of the activity, and then, as in video games with levels, the activity is enhanced with slightly more 

complex challenges. Obviously it is important not just to complete the activity, but also to take a step 

back, to explain the link with the concept being learned, and possibly to include a historical element as 

an illustration, as Viéville and Tort (2013) did. Getting the participants to talk about it, for example in a 

discussion or a question-and-answer session, enables further information to be gathered about the 

activity (Duflot et al., 2015).

Another aspect is the construction or the setting up of everyday objects for use during the activity (e.g. 

organizing chairs to make a maze for a robot, or building a graph on which to walk through the 

execution of an algorithm). Involving pupils in this (or suggesting that they then run the activity) is very 

worthwhile, so that they are playing an active role in their own learning, given that engagement is well 

known to drive learning. It is also very important for these activities to be ‘infectious’, in the sense that 

the learners of today may be the teachers of tomorrow. Making them want to be the teacher is, for 

some children, an important factor in engagement. We have observed this during field work, and this 

has been confirmed by approaches such as object-oriented learning (Hannan, Chatterjee, & Duhs, 

2013). 

2.2

The potential of unplugged computing activities in education 

The educational benefits of unplugged activities are discussed, for example, in Wohl, Porter and 

Clinch (2015) and Brackmann et al. (2017). The study by Wolf and colleagues tested how well the 

skills of understanding the concept of an algorithm (measured by the ability to describe a procedure), 

of logical prediction and of debugging were learned by children aged 5 to 7 years, and showed that 

these concepts were learned, particularly with unplugged activities (though there was no explicit 

comparative study). The second study, concerning similar skills (problem decomposition, structure 

recognition, algorithm design, abstraction of a process from one context to another) with children aged 

10 to 12 years, establishes that unplugged activities make a significant contribution to learning, by 

comparison to a control group. We take into consideration the didactic aspects and we use the 

reference system developed by Curzon, Dorling, Ng, Selby and Woollard (2014) and the earlier 

educational research of Calmet, Hirtzig and Wilgenbus (2016). The work done by Bell, Alexander, 

MSc SmartEdtech - LINE

Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged and unplugged mode.

7

Freeman and Grimley (2009) led to the development of an unplugged computing curriculum 

(https://csunplugged.org) and to a precise definition of unplugged computing, which we summarize 

here. Unplugged computing refers to the discovery or acquisition of computing concepts without the 

use of digital tools. Learning computing using unplugged methods is not restricted to a basic level of 

understanding of a simple algorithm. It includes, for example in the case of Duflot (2016), 

understanding a programmable machine and, in the case of Calmet, Hirtzig and Wilgenbus (2016), 

concepts associated with data and data representation, networks and robotics. A study should be 

conducted on each of these aspects. Unplugged computing activities thus rely on interactions 

between the pupil and their spatial environment during an activity that should be meaningful in terms 

of the activity’s development (Shelton, 2016). There is currently little research into the effects of 

unplugged computing, but what there is provides valuable insights. The research by Faber, Wierdsma, 

Doornbos, van der Ven and de Vette (2017) looked at lesson design for unplugged programming 

activities. They make recommendations such as taking account of differences in pupils’ skill levels 

when designing unplugged activities so that the activities on offer have varying degrees of complexity. 

They also recommend clearly explaining, after an unplugged activity, how the concept will be used 

when the pupils work with computers. From a teaching perspective, unplugged activities also breed 

confidence among teachers in their own computing abilities and an understanding of the concepts of 

computational thinking. Teachers also learn teaching techniques for the introduction of computational 

thinking, which they can include in their own practice (Curzon et al., 2014). Teachers’ confidence 

about computing is particularly important at a time when computing is starting to appear on official 

curricula. The work done by Wohl, Porter and Clinch (2015) most closely resembles our research 

objectives. They compared the effectiveness of unplugged activities, tangible programming with 

Cubelets, and programming with a digital interface such as Scratch. They state that the pupils’ 

engagement was greatest with tangible programming, but that it was through the unplugged activities 

that the pupils developed the best understanding of the concepts of algorithm, data and data 

representation, logical prediction and debugging, according to the reference system developed by 

(Curzon et al., 2014).

2.3

The advantages of unplugged computing

Here, we present two differentiating aspects of unplugged computing compared to computing with 

visual programming tools on a digital device.

1)

The cognitive load of using a machine. During plugged activities, the machine itself requires 

not an insignificant amount of technical learning and involves a considerable cognitive load. An 

unplugged computing activity is less startling for pupils and teachers because it is a type of game 

played with other people. This makes it easier to work as a group or a whole class, and avoids minor 

technical issues unrelated to the concepts being studied. An unplugged computing activity is more 

N° 9999

8

 Romero & Viéville & Duflot-Kremer

familiar for pupils and teachers, because this type of game is also used for other mathematics-related 

subjects or for cross-disciplinary purposes such as learning self-control. Using machines imposes a 

cognitive load (Sweller, 1994) that can limit reflection on the general principles. In practice, some 

pupils also have difficulty listening to instructions or interacting with one another when working on a 

computer because so much of their attention is focused on the screen. This was observed in 

experiments set up during the production of the ‘1,2,3 codez’ manual (Calmet et al., 2016). Also, with 

unplugged computing it is easier to distinguish between understanding of concepts, and learning to 

use a technological tool. Unplugged computing can also make it easier to work as a group or a whole 

class, and avoids minor technical issues unrelated to the concepts being studied. 

2)

Embodied cognition. Playing using the body and learning through movement and action is a 

physically and cognitively engaging activity because it uses procedural and episodic memory (the 

activity often consists of a series of scenarios) and also semantic memory, with interaction between 

them. This is a common finding confirmed by studies such as Owen and colleagues (2016) in respect 

of procedural memory; this type of link between episodic and semantic memory is well established 

(Tulving, 1972).

3)

Tangible analogy. The main purpose seems to us to be constructing a tangible analogy for the 

abstract concepts encountered in computing. This notion of ‘metaphor’ means creating a concrete 

situation that appropriates the mechanisms to be used as the basis for constructing a representation 

of the concept to be learned. Using something to represent something else with which it shares some 

essential quality means giving an opportunity to take a step back and look at the subject being learned 

from a different perspective. The moment when the metaphor reaches its limits is also important: as 

soon as the learner says “it’s not the same”, the objective is met because the learner has begun to 

think about the subject. For example, how the TCP/IP transfer protocol works can be explained using 

a game consisting of sending messages around the class using Post-it notes, giving a physical 

experience of the concepts of addressing and connectivity, and the need for acknowledgement of 

receipt and retransmission on timeout: eventually the learners realize that datagrams circulating on 

the internet have to have additional functionalities. This aspect needs to be examined in more detail, 

for example using research such as that of Sander (2000) as the starting point.

4)

Unplugged activities can then be followed up by plugged activities, because enlightened use 

of computers is still one of the main reasons for learning computing. It could even be frustrating to 

engage in activities presented as computing activities without ever using a computer; it is therefore 

MSc SmartEdtech - LINE

Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged and unplugged mode.

9

necessary to ensure activities initially carried out unplugged can be transposed to plugged activities. 

5)

Another aspect is the construction or the setting up of everyday objects for use during the 

activity (e.g. organizing chairs to make a maze for a robot, or building a graph on which to walk 

through the execution of an algorithm). Involving pupils in this (or suggesting that they then run the 

activity) is very worthwhile, so that they are playing an active role in their own learning, given that 

engagement is well known to drive learning. ‘Low-tech’ working makes it easier to use these 

educational drivers. This links to the idea of questioning where and when the use of computers is 

valuable (or not) in our everyday lives.

3. Analysis of some practices.

Unplugged activities do not require any computer equipment, but our qualitative observations during 

dozens of activities trialed as part of Class’Code show that they have much greater value than simply 

making up for a lack of equipment. During this experiment, despite a major effort to give the 

programming activity more structure between the initial testing of the protocol and the second trial 

being run, the pupils still had certain difficulties understanding the activity. When they were doing the 

movement activity on Scratch, the pupils wondered whether they could add blocks of a similar type to 

those already selected by the research team. Problems understanding the activity also emerged 

regarding how to assemble the blocks to create the code sequences. After the second iteration, we 

added some notes explaining that the pupils can use the same blocks more than once. We also added 

a sample function to help them understand how to create functions. To keep the artifacts produced 

with Scratch, an Educator account was created following the second iteration. 

Analysis of the ‘robot game’ activity 

The purpose of the ‘robot game’ unplugged activity is to introduce learners to the concept of 

instructions, which form the basis of computer programs. This activity introduces them to algorithms 

and to programming instructions without using any computer technology. With this type of activity, the 

pupil plays the role of a robot, which must follow the movement instructions given by two other pupils 

verbally and with pictograms corresponding to movement programming instructions (go forwards, go 

backwards, turn right, turn left). With this type of activity, the educational concepts of programming 

and robotics can be introduced while using skills associated with the pupils’ spatial awareness 

(Romero & Vallerand, 2016). In her research, Duflot

5
 identifies the robot game as offering the potential 

to work with programming concepts and processes, algorithms, numbers, spatial awareness, 

movement (absolute and relative) on a grid, and differentiation of left and right. 

5

 https://members.loria.fr/MDuflot/ 

N° 9999

10

 Romero & Viéville & Duflot-Kremer

Figure 1. Secondary pupils playing the robot game

Playing the robot game or the place of play in unplugged computing

In the activity proposed by Duflot (2016)

6

, before starting to program, the facilitators (teachers or 

science mediators) set up the environment in which the pupil playing the robot will move. Using a 

sheet can make it easier to set out a landscape or scene because it enables real obstacles (chairs, 

tables, etc.) to be added or representations of obstacles to be drawn on the sheet. Another advantage 

of this method is that the precise distance corresponding to one step can be specified (using dots or a 

grid) and it enables very precise quarter turns to be made. 

6

 https://pixees.fr/dis-maman-ou-papa-cest-quoi-un-algorithme-dans-ce-monde-numerique-%E2%80%A8/

MSc SmartEdtech - LINE

Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged and unplugged mode.

11

Figure 3. Robot game on a landscape created with a sheet.

In this environment, the places where the robot can and cannot walk are clearly explained, along with 

the commands it can execute. To begin with, absolute movements can be made by fixing the direction 

in which the pupil playing the robot is facing and making the pupil do translations but not rotations. 

Figure 4. Sequence of movements shown with arrows.

Later on, the language can be changed to include rotations with the movements. This means that the 

movements become relative and the perspective is therefore changed. For the pupils playing the 

programmers, the programme can be made as a series of arrows, making it accessible even to 

children who have not yet learned to read. Once the pupils have understood the principle of writing a 

sequence of instructions and transmitting them to the pupil playing the robot, additional challenges 

can be introduced (crossing the river, getting to the woods, etc.). To vary the programs, objects can be 

placed at certain points in the landscape and instructions to pick up all the objects at the robot’s feet 

can be added. 

N° 9999

12

 Romero & Viéville & Duflot-Kremer

Figure 5. Designing programs for the robot.

To extend the learning objectives, bugs can be slipped into the programs. To begin with, pupils have 

to describe the program executed by the robot, then later on they have to correct the bugs in the 

program to achieve the objective. It is also interesting to translate a program from one language into 

another by switching from absolute movements to relative movements, and vice versa.

6 

Conclusion 

Learning computing is a necessity in the digital era if people are to switch from being digital 

consumers to critical, creative citizens (Romero et al., 2017). Computing can be taught in a highly 

procedural way or in ways that are more engaging and creative for the learners (Romero, 2016). Our 

experience is that teachers and science mediators are now using enlightened practices, their actions 

on the ground are assessed among their target audiences (satisfaction and measurement of what has 

been learned) and those involved in this scientific mediation reflect together on their practices and on 

how they can be improved.

However, it would be worth giving more sustained consideration to setting up research in the 

educational sciences on the development of computational thinking using different types of plugged 

and unplugged activities.

MSc SmartEdtech - LINE

Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged and unplugged mode.

13

References

Baron, G.-L., & Bruillard, É. (2013). École et dispositifs technologiques: points de vue croisés. 

Carrefours de l’éducation, (2), 117–129.

Bell, T., Alexander, J., Freeman, I., & Grimley, M. (2009). Computer science unplugged: School 

students doing real computing without computers. The New Zealand Journal of Applied Computing 

and Information Technology, 13(1), 20–29.

Bell, T., Witten, I. H., & Fellows, M. (1998). Computer Science Unplugged: Off-line activities and 

games for all ages. Computer Science Unplugged.

Calmet, C., Hirtzig, M., & Wilgenbus, D. (2016). 1,2,3 Codez. Editions le Pommier.

Canellas, C., De La Higuera, C., Peinchaud, É., & Roche, M. (2016). Class’ Code a un an... et c’est un 

commencement. 1024 – Bulletin de la société informatique de France, (9), 19-24.

Curzon, P., Dorling, M., Ng, T., Selby, C., & Woollard, J. (2014). Developing computational thinking in 

the classroom: a framework.

Desgagné, S., Bednarz, N., Lebuis, P., Poirier, L., & Couture, C. (2001). L’approche collaborative de 

recherche en éducation: un rapport nouveau à établir entre recherche et formation. Revue des 

sciences de l’éducation, 27(1), 33–64.

Duflot, M. (2016). Jouer à «robot-idiot» pour s’initier aux algorithmes. Pixees. Available at 

https://pixees.fr/dis-maman-ou-papa-cest-quoi-un-algorithme-dans-ce-monde-numerique-

%E2%80%A8/

Duflot, M., Quinson, M., Masseglia, F., Roy, D., Vaubourg, J., & Viéville, T. (2015). When sharing 

computer science with everyone also helps avoiding digital prejudices. In Scratch2015AMS. 

Amsterdam, Netherlands. Available at https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01154767

Faber, H. H., Wierdsma, M. D., Doornbos, R. P., van der Ven, J. S., & de Vette, K. (2017). Teaching 

Computational Thinking to Primary School Students via Unplugged Programming Lessons. Journal of 

the European Teacher Education Network, 12, 13–24.

Grover, S., & Pea, R. (2013). Computational Thinking in K–12 A Review of the State of the Field. 

Educational Researcher, 42(1), 38-43. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X12463051

Hannan, L., Chatterjee, H., & Duhs, R. (2013). Object Based Learning: A powerful pedagogy for 

higher education. Museums and Higher Education Working Together: Challenges and Opportunities. 

ed./Anne Boddington, 159–168.

Heintz, F., Mannila, L., & Färnqvist, T. (2016). A review of models for introducing computational 

thinking, computer science and computing in K-12 education. In Frontiers in education conference 

(FIE), 2016 IEEE (p. 1–9). IEEE.

Joffredo-Le Brun, S., Morellato, M., Sensevy, G., & Quilio, S. (2017). Cooperative engineering as a 

joint action. European Educational Research Journal, 147490411769000. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/1474904117690006

Lye, S. Y., & Koh, J. H. L. (2014). Review on teaching and learning of computational thinking through 

programming: What is next for K-12? Computers in Human Behavior, 41, 51–61.

Moreno-León, J., & Robles, G. (2015). Dr. Scratch: a Web Tool to Automatically Evaluate Scratch 

Projects. In Proceedings of the Workshop in Primary and Secondary Computing Education (p. 132–

N° 9999

14

 Romero & Viéville & Duflot-Kremer

133). ACM.

Owen, K. B., Parker, P. D., Van Zanden, B., MacMillan, F., Astell-Burt, T., & Lonsdale, C. (2016). 

Physical activity and school engagement in youth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 

Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 129–145.

Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., … others. 

(2009). Scratch: programming for all. Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 60–67.

Resnick, M., & Siegel, D. (2015, November 10). A Different Approach to Coding. Available at 

https://medium.com/bright/a-different-approach-to-coding-d679b06d83a#.b9jcw2js5

Román-González, M., Pérez-González, J.-C., & Jiménez-Fernández, C. (2017). Which cognitive 

abilities underlie computational thinking? Criterion validity of the Computational Thinking Test. 

Computers in Human Behavior, 72, 678-691.

Romero, M, Noirpoudre, S., & Viéville, T. (2018). Apprentissage du code ? Que disent les sciences de

l’éducation. Pixees. Available at https://pixees.fr/apprentissage-du-code-que-disent-les-sciences-de-

leducation/

Romero, M. (2016). De l’apprentissage procédural de la programmation à l’intégration 

interdisciplinaire de la programmation créative. Formation et profession, 24(1), 87-89. 

https://doi.org/10.18162/fp.2016.a92

Romero, M. Lille, B., & Patino, A. (Éd.). (2017). Usages créatifs du numérique pour l’apprentissage au 

XXIe siècle (Vol. 1). Quebec: Presses de l’Université du Québec.

Romero, M.., & Loufane. (2016). ViBot, le robot. Quebec, QC: Publications du Québec.

Romero, M., & Netto, S. (2018). Séminaire de recherche organisé par l’équipe pédagogique du 

master IME et le laboratoire TECHNÉ de l’université de Poitiers « Apprendre à programmer à l’école:  

représentations sociales et pratiques des enseignants » [Video]. Available at 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dTEKcW2bA7M

Romero, M., & Vallerand, V. (2016). Guide d’activités technocréatives pour les enfants du 21e siècle 

(Vol. 1). Quebec, QC: Livres en ligne du CRIRES. Available at 

http://lel.crires.ulaval.ca/public/guidev1.\_guide\_dactivites\_technocreatives-romero-vallerand-2016.pdf

Sander, E. (2000). L’analogie, du naïf au créatif: analogie et catégorisation. Editions L’Harmattan.

Sensevy, G., Forest, D., Quilio, S., & Morales, G. (2013). Cooperative engineering as a specific 

design-based research. ZDM, 45(7), 1031–1043.

Shelton, C. (2016). Time to plug back in? The role of “unplugged” computing in primary schools. ITTE 

MSc SmartEdtech - LINE

 
 
Activity for learning computational thinking in plugged and unplugged mode.

15

Newsletter, (2016).

Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty, and instructional design. Learning and 

instruction, 4(4), 295–312.

Torp, L. (2002). Problems as possibilities: Problem-based learning for K-16 education. ASCD.

Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. Organization of memory, 1, 381–403.

Viéville, T., & Tort, F. (2013). Donner du sens aux éléments de technologie : l’exemple des URI. In B.

Drot-Delange, G.-L. Baron, & E. Bruillard (Éd.), Didapro5 - DidaSTIC: Didactique de l’informatique et

des STIC en milieu éducatif. Clermont-Ferrand, France: Université Blaise Pascal, Université Paris V, 

ENS Cachan/IFé. Available at https://hal.inria.fr/hal-00843963

Wohl, B., Porter, B., & Clinch, S. (2015). Teaching Computer Science to 5-7 year-olds: An initial study 

with Scratch, Cubelets and unplugged computing. In Proceedings of the Workshop in Primary and 

Secondary Computing Education (p. 55-60). ACM.

N° 9999

 
 
 
 
