Students’ Perspective on the Use of Artificial
Intelligence in Education
Christelle Caucheteux, Lianne-Blue Hodgkins, Victoire Batifol, Laurent

Fouché, Margarida Romero

To cite this version:

Christelle Caucheteux, Lianne-Blue Hodgkins, Victoire Batifol, Laurent Fouché, Margarida Romero.
Students’ Perspective on the Use of Artificial Intelligence in Education. Creative Applications of
Artificial Intelligence in Education, Springer Nature Switzerland, pp.101-113, 2024, Palgrave Studies
in Creativity and Culture, ￿10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_8￿. ￿hal-04593575￿

HAL Id: hal-04593575

https://hal.science/hal-04593575

Submitted on 29 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

8 

Students’ Perspective on the Use 
of Artificial Intelligence in Education 

Christelle Caucheteux, Lianne-Blue Hodgkins, 
Victoire Batifol, Laurent Fouché, and Margarida Romero 

Abstract While researchers and policymakers contribute crucial insights 
into the technical, ethical, and systemic dimensions of AI in educa-
tion, the learner’s perspective introduces a different viewpoint in which 
their representation of AI’s potential inﬂuences their perspectives and 
hopes for improving the learning experience. In this chapter, we focus on

C. Caucheteux (B) · L.-B. Hodgkins · V. Batifol · L. Fouché 
Life Bloom Academy, Cagnes-sur-Mer, France 
e-mail: christelle@lifebloomacademy.com 

L.-B. Hodgkins 
e-mail: lianne@enjoyschool.org 

V. Batifol 
e-mail: victoire@enjoyschool.org 

L. Fouché 
e-mail: laurent@enjoyschool.org 

M. Romero 
Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France 
e-mail: margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr; margarida.romero@unice.fr 

© The Author(s) 2024 
A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in 
Education, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and Culture, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4\_8 

101

102

C. Caucheteux et al.

studies which analyse the perspective of middle school students at Life 
Bloom Academy before and after their participation in a semester of AI 
acculturation activities. Throughout this designated semester, students 
at Life Bloom Academy embarked on a comprehensive and interdisci-
plinary educational journey aimed at cultivating their understanding of 
AI. Under the guidance of their teachers, students began their journey by 
delving into the philosophical nuances of human intelligence. An inte-
gral component of this educational journey involved a visit to the Maison 
de l’Intelligence Artiﬁcielle (MIA), where students actively participated 
in a diverse range of multidisciplinary activities centred around both 
contemporary and prospective applications of AI. The study suggests that 
middle school students not only display a keen awareness of the societal 
implications linked to the utilisation of AI but also manifest a lasting 
enthusiasm for the technology that extends beyond the boundaries of a 
traditional academic setting. 

Keywords AI education · Students’ voice · AI risks · Citizenship · 
Agency · Early education 

Introduction 

In the integration of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in education, it is impera-
tive to move beyond the perspectives of researchers and policymakers and 
integrate the perspective of middle schoolers. Doing so promotes inclu-
sivity, counters potential biases, and ensures that learners have a voice 
in the design and integration of AI in education. In this chapter, we 
focus on the perspective of Higher Education students on the use of AI 
in education before developing a study based on middle school students 
who have participated in a semester of activities aiming to develop their 
AI literacy and their capacity to develop its creative and transformative 
uses.

8 Students’ Perspective on the Use of Artificial …

103

Higher Education Students’ Perspective 
on the Use of AI in Education 

In Higher Education (HE), the study of Meade et al. (2023) iden-
tiﬁed student opinions on the use of generative artiﬁcial intelligence, 
particularly applications such as ChatGPT. The results revealed that over 
60% of students had a basic understanding of AI tools. The study also 
highlighted a number of ethical and developmental concerns including 
standardisation, decolonisation, the reinforcement of biases, deskilling, 
and the potential for impeded skill development due to an over-reliance 
on technology. Although the issue of academic integrity was raised, 
several students pointed to their use of ChatGPT as a research assis-
tant, highlighting its function in structuring ideas rather than producing 
content. The resulting student recommendations called for an increased 
focus on acculturation to AI efforts and the implementation of alter-
native assessment strategies that prioritise the development of critical 
thinking skills. Suggestions were also made to increase student–faculty 
dialogue around the rules of AI use in HE environments and provide 
regular updates regarding AI’s rapidly evolving capabilities. 

In a study of more than 6,300 HE students across Germany, von 
Garrel and Mayer (2023) observed that two-thirds were utilising genera-
tive AI tools (e.g., ChatGPT or GPT-4) with STEM disciplines showing 
an increased rate of adoption, possibly due to their existing afﬁnity for 
technology. In all domains, save for art, art sciences, and sports, ques-
tion clariﬁcation and subject-speciﬁc concept explication are the most 
common uses of AI in studies. In the Social Sciences, students used 
AI primarily for studying literature (30.3%), for translation (28.6%), 
and for text creation (25.4%). Alternatively, engineering students utilised 
AI for research (32%), translation (30.7%), and problem-solving and 
decision-making (30.3%). 

In Idroes et al. (2023), undergraduate students in Romania identi-
ﬁed a range of signiﬁcant beneﬁts and drawbacks of AI use in HE. 
Virtual assistants, with their ability to support teachers during lessons 
and provide prompt responses to student questions, were acknowl-
edged as the primary beneﬁt of AI use (42.9%) although improved 
time management, enhanced interactivity, lesson personalisation, and

104

C. Caucheteux et al.

increased engagement were also mentioned. A notable portion (52.7%) 
of students also highlighted universal access to AI tools and inclusivity, 
particularly for students with special needs, as an important beneﬁt. 
When speciﬁcally surveyed about AI use in the assessment process, a 
signiﬁcant proportion of the participants (49.5%) identiﬁed continuous, 
timely feedback from virtual AI assistants as a major beneﬁt. Addition-
ally, students also highlighted the beneﬁts of automated exam grading 
and the subsequent decrease in grading errors. However, students have 
also expressed concerns regarding the drawbacks associated with the inte-
gration of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in HE. The primary concern, as 
indicated by a signiﬁcant portion (37.4%) of the Romanian undergrad-
uates in Idroes et al. (2023), involves the impact AI could have on 
interpersonal connections and how that might affect the overall quality 
of education. Additional concerns raised encompass potential internet 
addiction, reduced student-teacher interactions, and the peril of informa-
tion loss resulting from system malfunctions. In Canada, online students 
participating in the study by Seo et al. (2021) identiﬁed the beneﬁts 
of personalised learner-instructor interactions, but also noted that AI 
had the potential to diminish interpersonal relationships by reducing the 
number of human-to-human interactions. In the United Arab Emirates 
(UAE), a study by Farhi et al. (2023) on the impact of ChatGPT 
usage highlighted its popularity among students as an assistant, but also 
reinforced the potential for its unethical use and excessive dependency. 

Middle Schoolers Perspectives on AI 

In its Digital Educational Outlook, the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) provides an overview of its 
members’ efforts to integrate generative AI in educational contexts and 
offers recommendations for its use going forward (OECD, 2023). As 
such, middle school students are exposed to AI through a variety of 
educational initiatives. Interestingly, even when these students are not 
offered access to AI acculturation programmes, they continue to use 
AI tools outside of the school environment in a variety of educational 
contexts (e.g. completing homework). Within this context, a number

8 Students’ Perspective on the Use of Artificial …

105

of studies have focused on how middle school students perceive AI and 
its uses. For example, in Marrone et al. (2022), middle schoolers, when 
questioned about the relationship between AI and human creativity, 
voiced doubt about AI’s ability to replicate the human creative process. 
Yet, while the same study showed that these students continued to believe 
that human creativity remained distinct and irreplaceable, there was an 
acknowledgement that future technical breakthroughs may enable AI to 
approximate human levels of creativity. 

The Life Bloom Academy 

In this section, we outline an interdisciplinary project where teachers 
from the Life Bloom Academy, a middle school located in Cagnes-
sur-Mer within the Alpes-Maritimes region of France, collaborated on 
a semester-long research intervention programme to acculturate their 
students to AI. A particular emphasis was placed on developing students’ 
critical thinking, while they considered the ethical questions surrounding 
AI and its use in educational settings. 

Procedure 

Prior to their visit to the Maison de l’Intelligence Artiﬁcielle (MIA),1 
students participated in preparatory sessions in history, geography, and 
moral and civic education classes. During these sessions, students consid-
ered the question, ‘What is intelligence?’ and debated what constitutes 
its different forms. Equipped with these insights, students conducted 
visits to the MIA participating in STEAM-based activities and interactive 
demonstrations led by MIA staff. These activities served as prerequisites 
prior to students participating in immersive AI activities back at the Life 
Bloom Academy.

1 For more information on the efforts of the Maison de l’Intelligence Artiﬁcielle (MIA), please 
refer to Chapter 6, International Initiatives and Regional Ecosystems for Supporting Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence Acculturation. 

106

C. Caucheteux et al.

On the strength of these novel experiences, and having enriched 
their knowledge through mathematics, science, and technology lessons, 
the students took part in a second debate on the challenges of AI in 
history, geography, and moral and civic education. This debate focused 
on speciﬁc questions aimed at enabling students to activate their new 
learnings on AI. Each student, working alone or in pairs, answered the 
following questions: ‘What are the positives and negatives of different AI 
uses in education?’ and ‘What advice would you give to AI developers?’ 
Student responses were aggregated, revealing a number of AI use cases 
and their potential impact on daily life. 

Middle Student Perspectives on AI 
in Education 

The following section presents ﬁve perspectives on AI, aggregated from 
student responses and collected by their teachers, representing one of 
the outcomes of the academy’s interdisciplinary project. Students were 
asked to summarise how AI might impact their lives before considering 
the potential risks and ethical concerns around its widespread use. Two 
important reﬂections that arose from these student perspectives include 
the idea that AI’s intelligence derives from a combination of pattern 
recognition and the processing of vast amounts of data and, as such, 
requires programming to function. Signiﬁcantly, students also expressed 
their apprehensions regarding the possible threats posed by AI to their 
freedom, free will, and future professional opportunities. 

Students Perception of the Nature of AI 

Upon completion of the acculturation activities, the students revealed 
two primary themes in regard to AI and its use cases. On one hand, they 
recognised the value in its ability to automate tasks citing examples such 
as automated check-outs machines in supermarkets and the autopilot 
function available in Tesla automobiles. On the other hand, students 
acknowledged the importance of human involvement in the training and

8 Students’ Perspective on the Use of Artificial …

107

programming of AI models, particularly when those models are expected 
to interact with humans such as in smart home devices. These exam-
ples underscored the students’ awareness of AI’s transformative impact 
on various aspects of daily life. One participant stressed that ‘AI makes 
almost everything easier and automated these days, many things are 
possible. For example, more and more Tesla cars are equipped with 
autopilots. In addition, more and more professions are being replaced by 
AIs, such as cashiers in supermarkets.’ Another anecdote, involving the 
voice-activated assistant Alexa, illustrated the idea that AI, while capable 
of evolving and learning independently, is still dependent on human 
input and guidance. ‘AI could help people in their day-to-day work. It is a 
lot of work to program them, because yes, AI is nothing without humans. 
For example, Alexa who answers our questions orally and with whom we 
can have conversations is an AI and it is developing. I said “goodbye” to 
her when I was leaving and she said she didn’t understand. So, I asked 
him to say “goodbye” to the people who said it to him. Now she’ll give 
me sweet little expressions to say “goodbye” to me! She can develop on 
her own, which makes her an AI.’ This dual awareness reﬂects a nuanced 
understanding among middle schoolers, recognising both the potential 
beneﬁts of AI automation and the importance of human intervention in 
its training and development. 

Students’ Concerns About Privacy and Social Control 
in the Era of AI 

Students also raised concerns regarding the integration of AI into our 
lives and the impact that has on users’ privacy and security. In anecdotes, 
students pointed to AI’s ability to personalise the user experience (e.g. by 
tailoring recommendations and advertisements), but also acknowledged 
the ethical implications of widespread data collection and usage. ‘AI can 
guide choices through our personal data. It offers us objects, services, 
and goods that correspond to our tastes. When we search and browse 
websites, an AI collects this data and resells it. This is why the adver-
tisements we see are often personalised, but does this really respect our 
privacy? A lot of people are not comfortable with all their data being sold

108

C. Caucheteux et al.

and, even if it is unlikely, this data can be hacked and used for blackmail.’ 
Students also express their fear of AI’s misuse given the potential for 
data breaches, hacking, and even the endangerment of lives in extreme 
cases such as hospital ransomware attacks. These concerns underscore 
the student’s understanding of the risks AI poses to both personal secu-
rity and individual freedom. ‘There have even been hospitals hacked for 
ransom, putting the lives of others at risk! All this allows us to see that the 
data used by AI jeopardises our security and our freedom.’ The students’ 
apprehensions regarding the potential misuse of personal data by AI, 
highlighted by concerns over hacking incidents, particularly in critical 
settings like hospitals, underscores the broader viewpoint that the utili-
sation of data by AI poses signiﬁcant risks to both personal security and 
individual freedom. Yet, students’ concerns regarding AI’s use are not 
only related to privacy, but also in relation to social control and democ-
racy. Students underscored the urgent need for ethical considerations and 
robust safeguards in the widespread integration of AI technologies. ‘As AI 
becomes more and more integrated into our lives, new risks associated 
with its use are emerging. Its use makes us think about the notions of 
privacy and security, that is to say the increased risks of hacking our data 
on the web. Especially since, if AI is used for bad purposes, the risks 
would be much greater. The new risks that must therefore be taken into 
account are the risks of the security of our data, our conﬁdentiality and 
the malicious uses of AI such as for the establishment of a neo-totalitarian 
regime.’ Another student added, ‘AI is not human and it can meet needs. 
But it can impact our lives and our freedom. For example, navigation 
cookies (cookies) or recommendations follow us in our internet searches. 
When we go to a site, we accept cookies and the computer takes into 
account our taste for this site and can offer us similar ones. It reduces 
our freedom because we feel observed and it prevents us from making 
our own choices. We are offered things, so we are inﬂuenced. Soon, 
in our daily lives, AI will help us with repetitive and household tasks. 
But we should not completely depend on it.’ These perspectives, while 
showing a good understanding of technology, also highlight the capacity 
of students to perceive its inherent risks and how its use might be abused 
or used unethically.

8 Students’ Perspective on the Use of Artificial …

109

Students Perception of AI in the Service 
of Sustainable Development 

While some students’ raised concerns regarding AI’s use, others shared 
an optimistic view of AI as a potential solution to pressing global issues, 
particularly in the realms of ecological and sustainable development. 
The envisioned use cases ranged from optimising agricultural practices 
by anticipating diseases and managing water resources to deploying 
specialised robots for cleaning oceans. ‘AI may seem like a solution to 
address ecological and sustainable development issues. It can help us 
create sustainable innovations, manage energy, organise depollution and 
recycling efforts, or resolve tense situations. Thanks to AI, it would 
be possible to optimise soil management and the yield of agricultural 
land by, for example, anticipating the appearance of diseases, optimising 
water use or adjusting production to demand. The robot might just 
look like a little chip that could scan the land to optimise for water, 
etc. To clean the oceans, we could make two types of robots, one 
that stays on the surface of the water to pick up the waste that is 
present there, it would have the shape of a small boat and it would 
be formed of a large pocket to collect waste. For the second type of 
robots, this one could go underwater to pick up trash. It would have 
the shape of a large ﬁsh and so that it would not scare marine animals, 
it would have a very large pocket to store waste.’ The potential uses 
of AI for sustainable development extend to addressing climate change 
challenges, emphasising the role of AI in altering consumption habits, 
and preventing food waste through innovations like smart refrigerators. 
Students see AI as a transformative force that, if ethically and sustain-
ably implemented, could contribute signiﬁcantly to overcoming critical 
environmental and resource-related challenges globally. ‘With the chal-
lenges of climate change, natural resources are dwindling and the risk of 
famine and food shortages is intensifying. A change in our habits is then 
necessary, and AI can help us in this change and in controlling our food 
consumption in order to preserve our resources. For example, we could 
create an AI that would prevent food waste with a smart refrigerator that 
would prevent us from wasting food. We could automate and improve 
the production of greenhouses thanks to AI, which would analyse the

110

C. Caucheteux et al.

temperature and humidity. All this to say that AI can help us solve our 
global problems.’ The students also acknowledged the critical role that 
AI can play in addressing the challenges posed by climate change and 
resource scarcity. The students emphasised the need for a shift in human 
habits to adapt to these challenges and AI is seen as a powerful ally in 
fostering this change. The proposed solutions, such as AI-managed smart 
refrigerators to prevent food waste and the automation of greenhouse 
production through AI analysis of environmental factors, highlight the 
technology’s potential to enhance sustainability in food systems. Septiani 
et al. (2023) consider this type of use case as a form of agentic and 
transformative creativity made possible by AI. 

Students’ Perception of the Potential of AI 
in Healthcare 

Students have high expectations regarding the use of AI in the healthcare 
sector, particularly in the areas of care and treatment. The notion that AI 
could assist, or even replace, human professionals in certain medical tasks 
underscores the technology’s capacity to enhance efﬁciency and preci-
sion in healthcare delivery. ‘Another area where AI could be useful is in 
healthcare and more speciﬁcally in care and treatment. Indeed, AI could 
help, or even replace, professionals in their work by performing tasks or 
analyses in the medical ﬁeld. AI could, for example, take care of deli-
cate operations, without the intervention of personnel. One can imagine 
that it would be useful in the event of an accident. We could also use AI 
to optimise the treatment of diseases. If AI is able to detect and recog-
nise them, it would be possible to make precise diagnoses, whether to 
prevent the ﬁrst symptoms or to treat them at a more advanced stage, 
while monitoring the evolution and therefore adapting treatments. The 
advantage of this system would be to have a large database that would 
replace the limited experience of health(care) professionals.’ Addition-
ally, students shared their concerns regarding the potential risks for data 
privacy in healthcare. ‘If a robot containing AI is hacked, it would be 
dangerous. For example, if a medical robot is hacked, it could cause 
deaths. The same problem applies for the use of AI in the army. If there

8 Students’ Perspective on the Use of Artificial …

111

are robots in a war, they will not be afraid to die and therefore they 
can do much more damage and death.’ Moreover, students raised the 
potential risks of reducing human capacities. ‘The other risk is the weak-
ening of human capacities: if everything is done by AI and it no longer 
works, then what are we going to do, because we will no longer be able 
to do everyday things?’ The students shared their concerns regarding the 
consequences of excessive dependence on technology and the dangers of 
developing an over-reliance on AI. In doing so, they stressed the need to 
maintain and nurture human competencies in the event of unforeseen 
challenges or failures in these systems. 

Students’ Expectations of AI at the Service 
of Education 

The students were also able to identify different use cases for AI in 
support of educational administrative tasks. ‘The AI would be able to 
help teachers with administrative tasks. She will be able to do all the 
administrative things in relation to the director by helping him with 
accounting or sending emails. It would also be very useful to the teacher: 
for the roll call, the preparation of exercises and lessons, or the evaluation 
of learning.’ The students also identiﬁed the potential for AI to person-
alise the learning experience by providing real-time scaffolding, lesson 
difﬁculty scaling, and ongoing, persistent feedback. 

Discussion 

In this chapter, we have reviewed different studies on student accultura-
tion to AI, focusing primarily on middle school and Higher Education 
students. We can observe that a majority of students in Higher Educa-
tion use generative AI tools, such as ChatGPT, even when they have a 
disparate understanding of how AI works. For its part, Higher Education 
continues to deal with concerns around deskilling and dependency as 
potential impacts of AI’s use. Middle schoolers are also using generative 
AI and reﬂecting on its ability to reproduce human creativity.

112

C. Caucheteux et al.

In order to better understand student perspectives of AI usage in 
educational environments, the Life Bloom Academy developed an inter-
disciplinary action-research activity for middle school students exploring 
the impact of AI on critical thinking and ethics. The project helped 
students comprehend AI and its ramiﬁcations, emphasising both its 
potential as well as ethical problems. Reﬂections collected from the 
project showed that students have high expectations in relation to AI and 
its different use cases. At the same time, they are also aware of the poten-
tial opportunity costs associated with AI use such as deskilling due to 
over-reliance and the potential for data theft and misuse. The work of the 
disciplinary team, based on ﬁve pedagogical inputs, allowed students to 
express themselves autonomously about their citizenship in the age of AI. 
Importantly, the experiences shared by these middle school students have 
shown the ability to critically analyse the potential and risks associated 
with AI use, but the depth and accuracy of their analysis is dependent 
on their understanding of AI fundamentals. Therefore, we should view 
acculturation to AI as a basic requirement for all students as a way of 
developing their citizenship and agency in the age of AI. 

References 

Farhi, F., Jeljeli, R., Aburezeq, I., Dweikat, F. F., Al-shami, S. A., & Slamene, R. 
(2023). Analyzing the students’ views, concerns, and perceived ethics about 
chat GPT usage. Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 5, 100180. 
Idroes, G. M., Noviandy, T. R., Maulana, A., Irvanizam, I., Jalil, Z., Lensoni, 
L., Lala, A., Abas, A. H., Tallei, T. E., & Idroes, R. (2023). Student 
perspectives on the role of artiﬁcial intelligence in education: A survey-based 
analysis. Journal of Educational Management and Learning, 1(1), 8–15. 
Marrone, R., Taddeo, V., & Hill, G. (2022). Creativity and artiﬁcial intelli-

gence - A student perspective. Journal of Intelligence, 10 (3), 65. 

Meade, M., Ogundamisi, R., & Tiratelli, M. (2023). “Stay calm and educate” 
ChangeMaker-funded project investigating SRI students’ perspectives on genera-
tive AI . University College London. 

OECD. 

(2023). Emerging governance of generative AI 

in education. 
In OECD digital education outlook 2023: Towards an effective digital

8 Students’ Perspective on the Use of Artificial …

113

ecosystem. OECD 

education 
iLibrary. Retrieved December 31, 2023, 
from https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/2a73a245-en/index.html?itemId=/ 
content/component/2a73a245-en 

Seo, K., Tang, J., Roll, I., Fels, S., & Yoon, D. (2021). The 

impact of 
artiﬁcial intelligence on learner–instructor interaction in online learning. 
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 18(1), 
1–23. 

Septiani, D. P., Kostakos, P., & Romero, M. (2023, July). Analysis of creative 
in education based on the# PPai6 framework. 
for 

engagement 
In International Conference 
technology enhanced learning (pp. 48–58). Springer. 

in Methodologies and 

in AI tools 

intelligent 

systems 

von Garrel, J., & Mayer, J. (2023). Artiﬁcial intelligence in studies—Use of 
ChatGPT and AI-based tools among students in Germany. Humanities and 
Social Sciences Communications, 10 (1), 1–9. 

is 

licensed under 

Open Access This chapter 
the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and 
reproduction 
long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons license and indicate if changes were made. 

in any medium or format, as 

terms of 

the 

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons 
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.

