Interaction between the limbic and sensori-motor cortico-basal loops : a
systemic framework to explain animal behaviour Bhargav Teja Nallapu,
Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Bhargav Teja Nallapu, Frédéric Alexandre. Interaction between the limbic
and sensori-motor cortico- basal loops : a systemic framework to explain
animal behaviour. SBDM 2018 - Eighth International Symposium on Biology
of Decision Making, May 2018, Paris, France. ￿hal-01820371￿

HAL Id: hal-01820371

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01820371

Submitted on 21 Jun 2018

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Bhargav Teja NALLAPU1,2,3, Frédéric ALEXANDRE1,2,3

1INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200 Avenue de la Vieille Tour, 33405 Talence,
France 2LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, UMR 5800,
Talence, France 3IMN, Université de Bordeaux, CNRS, UMR 5293, Bordeaux,
France

We propose an integrated framework of interaction between cortico-basal
loops, described as the projection of specific regions of sensory and
frontal cortex, experimentally observed to be involved in the generic
functioning of decision making and action selection of a primate
[Alexander et al., 1986]. These loops, acquiring stimulus information
and possible actions, project towards respective regions of the striatum
and connect back to the initial frontal areas to trigger the selected
action. We implement a framework of such cortico-basal loops, adapting a
well established neuronal model proposed in [Hazy et al., 2006], as a
set of two limbic loops and two sensori-motor loops. Two limbic loops
include (i) a preferential loop through the Orbito Frontal Cortex (OFC,
widely understood to represent states of the environment and their
learned preference value) and (ii) a motivation-guided loop through the
Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC), influencing the decision with the
agent’s internal needs and motivation.

Two sensori-motor loops consist of (i) an orientation loop through the
Parietal Cortex to orient towards the chosen stimulus and (ii) a motor
loop through the supplementary motor area to evoke an action to reach
the stimulus that is oriented towards. We study the dynamics of
hierarchy and competition among these cortico- basal loops, with
stronger emphasis on the role of internal (goal-driven behavior) and the
external stimuli emotional characteristics characteristics (stimulus
driven behavior) in the decision. We take into account the distributed
consensus among the loops depending on the dynamic situation [Pezzulo
and Cisek, 2016], role of neuromodulation and learning across these
loops and the role of external world. For experimentation, We
demonstrate how a virtual agent, considering a survival task, can
interact with an unknown and dynamic external environment. We use Malmo
([Johnson et al., 2016]), a platform on the top of Minecraft (the
well-known immersive world game) to evaluate the framework and explore
realistic scenarios that mimic survival tasks.

Framework of generic cortico-basal loops

Frontal cortex Sensory cortex

-   Basal Ganglia

What?

Preference

Limbic loops

Why?

Need

Orbito Frontal Cortex (OFC), Anterior Cingulate Cortex

(ACC)

Sensori-motor loops

Where?

Orientation

How?

Location

Frontal Eye Fields (FEF),

Motor Cortex (MC)

blocks

position

apple, cake, water

context orientation

World

MALMO

World - Agent - Items - Actions - State -

Adaptations : Embodiment of the agent Needs and preferences - Visibility
-

Reach, See, Appear

Figure

exploration decision orienting

approach

Versatile Behavior

With the above mentioned model and software environment, our aim is to
demonstrate multiple animal

behaviors using the same framework, with different internal and external
states resulting in different behaviors.

Stimulus-driven : While exploring the environment, multiple stimuli can
be perceived by the agent. The

relevance of the stimuli to the agent’s internal variables contributes
to the agent’s motivation in accessing it.

Goal-directed : With the constant monitoring of internal needs, from
previous learning, the agent selects the

stimuli that are relevant, as current goals and starts exploring in the
environment.

Opportunistic : In a typical goal-directed behavior, when the agent
encounters stmuli that are not relevant to

the current need, but perceived to be rewarding for a possible future
need, the agent should be able to put the

initial goal on hold, opportunistically exploit the current situation,
and then proceed with the ongoing goal.

REFERENCES

[Alexander et al., 1986] Alexander, G., DeLong, M., and Strick, P.
(1986). Parallel organization of functionally segregated circuits
linking basal

ganglia and cortex. Ann. Rev. Neurosci., 9:357–381.

[Hazy et al., 2006] Hazy, T. E., Frank, M. J., and O’Reilly, R. C.
(2006). Banishing the homunculus: making working memory work.

Neuroscience, 139(1):105–118.

[Johnson et al., 2016] Johnson, M., Hofmann, K., Hutton, T., and
Bignell, D. (2016). The malmo platform for artificial intelligence

experimentation. In IJCAI, pages 4246–4247.

[Pezzulo and Cisek, 2016] Pezzulo, G. and Cisek, P. (2016). Navigating
the affordance landscape: feedback control as a process model of

behavior and cognition. Trends in cognitive sciences, 20(6):414–424.

Learning

Acknowledgements

GIven the diverse role of ventral striatum (VS) across the loops, we
plan to integrated dopamine modulated

learning within each loop as well as across the loops to modulate each
other.

We thank Thierry VIEVILLE in the team MNEMOSYNE, INRIA Bordeaux, for
constant guidance and feedback in this work.

8 1 0 2

,

y a M – e c n a r F

,

s i r a P

,

i

g n k a M n o i s i c e D f o y g o l o B n o m u i s o p m y S l

i

a n o i t a n r e t n

I

h t h g E

i


