Modelling prefrontal-hippocampal interactions for
contextual controlled learning using artificial neural
networks
Hugo Chateau-Laurent, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Hugo Chateau-Laurent, Frédéric Alexandre. Modelling prefrontal-hippocampal interactions for con-
textual controlled learning using artificial neural networks. FENS Forum 2022, Jul 2022, Paris, France.
￿hal-03941366￿

HAL Id: hal-03941366

https://hal.science/hal-03941366

Submitted on 16 Jan 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Modelling prefrontal-hippocampal interactions for contextual 
controlled learning using artiﬁcial neural networks
Hugo Chateau-Laurent and Frédéric Alexandre
Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, LaBRI, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives

PFC-HPC interactions

Contextually-controlled recall

RL with episodic sequences

Context

Contextual 
modulations

A (🧀)

or

B (🧀)

?

The 

behavioral 
Task. 
paradigm is as follows: rats 
need to learn to dig under 
one of two rewards, one of 
which 
rewarded 
(Navawongse & Eichenbaum, 
2013).

being 

is used 

Task. The same behavioral 
paradigm 
in a 
learning 
reinforcement 
setup. The agent must learn 
to move to the correct odor 
location and dig in order to 
reward. When 
receive a 
a 
equipped 
hippocampus, it can learn to 
context-relevant 
replay 
experience.

with 

A

B

B 😍

Methods. We model DG as a sparse layer and CA3 as a reservoir of randomly connected 
neurons. A readout (hilus) is trained to predict the next DG pattern to be fed back to the 
reservoir, following the model of Lisman et al. (2005), which allows the hippocampus to 
learn sequences. Another readout is trained to decode the current pattern and send the 
content of hippocampal replay to the PFC. The PFC is trained as an actor critic and is able 
to send a query for hippocampal replay.

However, the network fails to recall the 2D, 3D and semantic sequences because it does not “know” which sequence to recall.

An autoencoder with contextual weight modulation is used to simulate interactions between the hippocampus and the 

frontal cortex in a contextual odor learning task.

are shown to be critical for contextual learning.

Consistent with reports of Navawongse & Eichenbaum (2013) and Peters et al. (2013), the fronto-hippocampal interactions 

Jaeger, Herbert. arXiv preprint (2014)

Navawongse, Rapeechai, and Howard Eichenbaum. Journal of Neuroscience 33.3 (2013): 1002-1013. 

Peters, Gregory J., et al. Learning & memory 20.4 (2013): 201-209.

Graphic design of reservoirs by Anthony Strock.

PARTENAIRES

Results. Modulation of hippocampal recall through projections from the contextual layer 
(PFC) enables the model to perform the contextual memory task. The relative efficacy of 
layer vs. weight modulation is layer-dependent. Furthermore, the PFC→DG connection’s 
ability to modulate recall is weaker than those of downstream modulations

The hippocampus and prefrontal cortex interact bidirectionally through multiple 
pathways. Their interaction is thought to play an important role in contextual controlled 
learning. The hippocampus enables rapid learning of multimodal associations. The 
prefrontal cortex learns to identify contextually relevant information to control 
in a goal-directed manner 
decision-making and hippocampal memory recall 
(Chateau-Laurent & Alexandre, 2021).

PFC-HPC pathways

DG

CA3

CA1

Methods. We model the hippocampus with an autoencoder-like network, following an 
approach similar to Santos-Pata et al. (2021). The input pattern is the concatenation of 
two odor patterns and an empty pattern. The target output is the concatenation of the 
input patterns and the pattern associated to the rewarded odor. The relative number of 
neurons in the entorhinal cortex, dentate gyrus, CA3 and CA1 layers follows the 
proportion found in biological rats. The contextual layer projects to bias different 
synaptic weights and layers.

Major PFC-HPC pathways, as reviewed by Eichenbaum (2017), are shown solid arrows. 
A recent model posits that contextual recall 
indirect 
PFC-Supramammillary nucleus-DG connection (dashed arrow ; Pilly et al., 2018).

is enabled by 

 the 

Preliminary results. Initial simulations suggest that the model is better able to adapt to 
reward reversal when the hippocampus module is used. Future studies will assess the 
ability of the model to perform better using hyperparameter optimization.

References

Chateau-Laurent H, Alexandre F. IJCCI. 2021.
Eichenbaum H. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2017.
Lisman JE, Talamini LM, Raffone A. Neural Networks. 2005.
Navawongse R, Eichenbaum H. Journal of Neuroscience. 2013.
Pilly PK, Howard MD, Bhattacharyya R. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2018.
Santos-Pata D, Amil AF, Raikov IG, Rennó-Costa C, Mura A, Soltesz I, Verschure PF. 
Iscience. 2021.

The hippocampus is thought to be involved in episodic memory, spatial navigation and relational memory. These 

apparently disparate functions can be accounted by considering that the more general and abstract hippocampal function 

is to allow ﬂexible navigation through the space of cortical representations. Yet, a unifying computational framework is 

A conceptor matrix (Jaeger, 2014) 

is constructed for each episode 

and used to ﬁlter the network 

still lacking. Here we use reservoir computing and autoencoders as tentative models of spatial navigation, episodic memory 

dynamics.

and contextual recall.

vision

audition

olfaction

goal

V₁

A₁

S₁

O₁

G₁

CORTEX

somato

stream of experience

V₂

A₂

S₂

O₂

G₂

V₃

A₃

S₃

O₃

G₃

V₄

A₄

S₄

O₄

G₄

encoding

recall

episodic

sequencing

□△○ Experienced episodes

■▲● Recalled episodes

HIPPOCAMPUS

Using such matrices allow for an accurate recall of 2D, 3D, and even 300D 

(linguistic) trajectories.

position vector

“Reservoir”

Recurrent Neural Network

encoding

s

l

l

e

c

d

i

r

g

decoding

A weight matrix is learned with the objective to 

allow episodic recall (replay a sequence in the 

absence of the driving input)

□△○ Experienced episodes

■▲● Recalled episodes

 
