Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education Margarida Romero,
Jonathan Reyes, Panos Kostakos

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Jonathan Reyes, Panos Kostakos. Generative Artificial
Intelligence in Higher Education. Alex Urmeneta; Margarida Romero.
Creative Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Springer
Nature Switzerland, pp.129-143, 2024, Palgrave Studies in Creativity and
Culture, 978-3-031-55271-7. ￿10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4_10￿.
￿hal-04593580￿

HAL Id: hal-04593580

https://hal.science/hal-04593580

Submitted on 30 May 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

10

Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

Margarida Romero, Jonathan Reyes, and Panos Kostakos

Abstract Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GAI) has become popular
recently with the advances in text and image generation tools (e.g.,
ChatGPT) that are easy to use for the general public. The emergence of
GAI has sparked a surge in academic studies within higher educa- tion
(HE) but also raised concerns about the changes related to policy
making. This chapter analyses the impact of GAI on HE, addressing its
uses learning, chatbot applications, and responsible AI implementation.
Evaluating both its beneﬁts and limitations, this chapter navigates
through diverse studies, presenting insights into GAI’s

language

in

M. Romero (B) · J. Reyes Université Côte d’Azur, Nice, France e-mail:
margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr; margarida.romero@unice.fr

J. Reyes e-mail: Jonathan.REYES-MARIMON@univ-cotedazur.fr

P. Kostakos University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland e-mail:
panos.kostakos@oulu.ﬁ

© The Author(s) 2024 A. Urmeneta and M. Romero (eds.), Creative
Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education, Palgrave Studies in
Creativity and Culture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55272-4_10

129

130

M. Romero et al.

potential deployment and ethical considerations.

in education, while emphasising the need for responsible

Keywords Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GAI) · Higher education ·
ChatBots · Assessment

Introduction

Generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GAI) was not a popular discussion
topic among faculty in Higher Education (HE) until the emergence of
tools such as ChatGPT. Since 2021, the academic discourse both in rela-
tion to policies in the use of AI, but also in relation to the potential
opportunities of AI for education, has started to rise as a research
topic (Southworth et al., 2023). Given the widespread availability of
generative AI tools like ChatGPT, it is imperative for Higher Education
Institu- tions (HEI) to carefully examine the practical applications and
possible difﬁculties of AI for both professors and students. Although we
must acknowledge the potential applications of AI, it is crucial to
address the issue of regulating its use in the context of university
work undertaken by undergraduate and graduate students. Rudolph et
al. (2023) point to the challenges facing HE institutions that continue
to use traditional assess- ment strategies when the availability of
tools such as ChatGPT makes it difﬁcult to evaluate the originality of
student work. Conversely, AI can be used to scaffold student learning
and create more personalised HE experiences.

GAI typically refers to advanced technology that

integrates deep learning models, trained on extensive datasets, gathered
from various public sources, user-generated content, licensed
third-party data, and information created by human reviewers (OpenAI,
2023). This tech- nology processes human generates outputs that closely
mimic human-generated content, predom- inantly in the form of text and
images (Lim et al., 2023). Due to their large scale, software developers
building these tools utilise models that frequently lack direct insights
about the quality and type of data used for training. Additionally, they
are often unable to meet data retention or privacy requirements given
their inability to store these data models

inputs, commonly known as prompts

, and

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

131

in their independent computing environments. Hence, similar to using a
search engine, a typical user currently relies on remote server
interactions when exchanging data through AGI tools. This raises
signiﬁcant concerns regarding privacy and the potential for information
leakage. This issue is particularly acute with AGI tools like ChatGPT,
which require more detailed text input, in contrast to typical search
engines that respond to relatively brief search queries.

In this chapter, we address these different domains by analysing the
uses of AI in HE, with a special focus on generative AI. The second
section addresses AI for language learning and translation in HE. The
third section explores the use of conversational agents (i.e., chatbots)
at the university level, while the last section addresses the
responsible uses of AI in HE with a special focus on the role of
assessments.

Uses of AI in Higher Education

Intelligence

integrating GAI

literature review, Baidoo-Anu and Ansah focused on In their 2023 General
Artiﬁcial (GAI) and education-related papers published in
English-language, peer-reviewed journals. The review aimed to achieve
two primary objectives: to evaluate the various methods of interacting
with ChatGPT, and to discern the advantages and disad- vantages of into
educational practices. Within this framework, the authors introduced a
typology categorising the observed beneﬁts of employing GAI in
education, encompassing areas such as personalised tutoring, Automated
Steady Grading (AGS), language trans- lation, interactive learning, and
adaptive learning. Simultaneously, the review outlined a series of
limitations associated with these AI applica- tions, including the lack
of human interaction, limited understanding of the technology, potential
biases in training data sets, lack of creativity, dependency on the data
available or generated for AI training, lack of contextual
understanding, limited ability to personalise instruction, and privacy
concerns. This detailed exploration of both beneﬁts and limi- tations
contributes to a more nuanced understanding of the impact of General
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GAI) in the realm of HE andragogy.

132

M. Romero et al.

is conducted through a self-study approach as

Several exploratory studies have applied prompt engineering (Lee et al.,
2023) to more effectively examine how the GPT-3.5 model aligns with
educational objectives and its suitability for such purposes. The
primary methodology involves analysing the model’s responses and
evaluating their congruence with educational objectives. This assess-
introduced by ment Hamilton et al. (2009). Cooper (2023) utilised
ChatGPT by presenting it with a series of questions designed to elicit
responses providing prac- tical guidance for teachers on classroom
applications. Findings suggest that ChatGPT performs well in generating
teaching units, rubrics, and quizzes. Additionally, the results indicate
that ChatGPT can aid educa- tors in the creation of science education
units structured around the 5Es model (Engage, Explore, Explain,
Elaborate, Evaluate), thereby assisting in the transition from initial
ideas to fully developed educational units. Similarly, Qadir (2023)
examined ChatGPT’s role in engineering education, underscoring its
potential as a generative AI tool across tech- nically demanding
educational settings. The research employs structured prompts as a
method for eliciting detailed AI responses that facili- tate various
real-life educational applications. Although not based on a speciﬁc
pedagogical framework, the study provides empirical evidence of
ChatGPT’s utility in engineering education. Its applications span
technical subjects like coding and mathematics, creative writing,
virtual tutoring, personalised learning, test preparation, and language
learning. Conversely, some of the disadvantages include the lack of
human inter- action in providing personalised feedback to learners.
Moreover, as the study involved an older model of ChatGPT (i.e., GPT-3.5
architecture), concerns regarding reliability, plagiarism, and
hallucinative misinfor- mation were noted as potential shortcomings when
using automated feedback. The paper also emphasises the growing
importance of prior knowledge and critical thinking, given their in
creating prompts that generate quality responses.

importance

Chan (2023) has studied the use of text-generative AI technologies in
Hong Kong universities to develop a framework for the integration of AI
into education. The study engaged 457 students and 180 faculty and staff
members. Chan has identiﬁed three dimensions: the pedagogical dimension,
the governance dimension, and the operational dimension

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

133

in the integration of AI in higher education. Within the context of HE
andragogy, Chan’s framework (2023) highlights the importance of
reengineering the assessment process given the innovative methodologies
made possible through the use of AI. In this sense, both the automatic
analysis, as well as the exploitation of learning analytics for
assessment purposes (Ouyang et al., 2023) were examined. Similarly, the
pedagog- ical dimension is also where Chan stresses the importance of
developing the transversal competencies considered critical for future
success in the innovation economy (Septiani et al., 2023).

Within the governance dimension, senior leadership plays a pivotal role
in addressing the complex considerations related to AI implementation in
education. This encompasses strategies to understand, identify, and
prevent academic misconduct and ethical dilemmas facilitated by AI, as
well as the establishment of robust policies and protocols for data
privacy, transparency, accountability, and security in AI usage. In this
sense, the AI Act, developed at the European level, aims to develop
trustworthy AI (Laux et al., 2023). The AI Act postulates different
requirements for ‘trustworthy’ AI: human agency and oversight, tech-
nical robustness and safety, privacy and data governance, transparency,
diversity, accountability, non-discrimination and fairness, societal and
environmental well-being, and accountability (EC, 2019). Furthermore,
the governance dimension extends to AI attribution and the clear deﬁni-
tion of roles and responsibilities for the technology’s implementation
and management, thereby ensuring accountability for its ethical use
within the institution. Equally signiﬁcant is the commitment to ensuring
equity in access to AI technologies, achieved through implementing
measures that guarantee fair and inclusive access to AI resources for
all students and faculty, while also addressing potential disparities in
AI utilisation across different demographic groups.

involving teaching and

The operational dimension,

learning stake- holders as well as IT staff, centres on the practical
aspects of AI implementation in university settings. This includes
establishing robust monitoring mechanisms to assess the effectiveness of
AI integration and continuously evaluating learning, and overall
educational outcomes. Moreover, this dimension encompasses comprehensive
training programmes and ongoing support structures that

impact on teaching,

its

134

M. Romero et al.

enhance AI literacy among faculty, staff, and students, while addressing
the challenges and beneﬁts of proﬁcient AI use across the university.

Sabzalieva and Valentini’s (2023) guide on the use of generative AI in
HE develops an introduction to the technology and provides different use
cases as an interactive tool fulﬁlling the role of tutor, socratic
opponent, or even co-designer.

AI for Language Learning and Translation

The prevalent use of English in research studies, publications, and
competitive grants at the international level creates an inclusivity
barrier, not only for faculty and students, but also for administrative
staff who lack the necessary proﬁciency in English to fully participate
in the academic process (Ingvarsdóttir & Arnbjörnsdóttir, 2013). This
linguistic dominance reduces the opportunities and competitiveness of
non-native English speakers and limits access to learning resources for
students who lack English ﬂuency. As such, AI translation tools, such as
Grammarly or Quilbot, can play a pivotal role in facilitating accessi-
bility, but also improving the overall quality of written work, from
both a grammatical and contextual perspective. Implementing AI-driven
trans- lation tools can reduce language barriers such as in the case of
the MSc Smart EdTech programme at the Université Côte d’Azur, where most
of the students and faculty are using English as a second language. With
an international cohort representing eighteen different countries, the
use of real-time translation tools during synchronous, online activities
helped create a more inclusive learning environment for non-ﬂuent,
English speakers. Similarly, the use of automatic note taking tools has
facilitated the creation of meeting minutes and made documenting
projects easier in the context of research initiatives such as the
Horizon AugMentor project.

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

135

Chatbots in Higher Education

Expanding from the pioneering work of Eliza (Weizenbaum, 1966),
acknowledged as the ﬁrst chatbot in academic research, the exploration
of chatbot-assisted learning environments has progressed signiﬁcantly
over the last few decades. Nevertheless, it is in recent years that
chatbots have experienced a substantial surge in both usage scenarios
and research within the educational realm, reaching a pinnacle in 2023
(Hwang & Chang, 2021). The most common application of chatbots in
educational settings is as a tool used to interact with predeﬁned
content learning paths, often referred to as guided learning (Akcora et
al., 2018). The current availability of generative AI chatbot services
and chatbot applica- tion programming interfaces (API) enables educators
to add a new layer of chatbot capabilities that can support active
learning approaches in education (Lo., 2023). Chatbots were created to
enable natural language interaction between humans and computers. As
such, chatbots can be considered as computer programmes that aim to
mimic some aspects of human interaction supported by machine
conversation systems, virtual agents, dialogue systems, and personal
assistants all with the goal of supporting the end-user (Suhaili et al.,
2021). The systematic literature review by Okonkwo and Ade-Ibijola
(2021) outlines the diverse applica- tions of chatbots in HE, including
teaching and learning (66%), research and development (19%), assessment
(6%), administration (5%), and advisory (4%).

Integrating chatbots into HE settings enables universities to address
the speciﬁc uses outlined in the UNESCO table on the use of genera- tive
AI (see Table 10.1). This is possible due to the versatile nature of
these tools and the adaptive experience they offer to users.
Furthermore, the ability of chatbots to understand and generate
human-like responses, known as Natural Language Processing (NLP),
creates a more intuitive way for students and educators to interact with
the tools (Maher et al., 2020; Rath et al., 2023), while also
facilitating the personalisation of the learning experience based on
individual student needs (Younis et al., 2023).

The inclusion of NLP capabilities in the training of chatbots has bene-
ﬁted developers and pedagogical staff seeking to personalise their use
for

136

M. Romero et al.

Table 10.1 Use of generative AI in higher education according to UNESCO

Role

Possibility engine

Description

AI generates

alternative ways of expressing an idea

Socratic

opponent

AI acts as an opponent or can help develop an argument

Collaboration

AI helps groups

coach

research and solve problems together

Guide on the

AI acts as a guide to

side

navigate physical and conceptual spaces

Example of implementation

Students write queries in ChatGPT and use the Regenerate response
function to examine alternative responses

Students enter prompts into

ChatGPT following the structure of a conversation or debate. Teachers
can ask students to use ChatGPT to prepare for discussions

Working in groups, students use ChatGPT to develop their ideas, identify
resources, and complete assignments Teachers use ChatGPT to

generate content for classes/ courses (e.g., discussion questions) and
advice on how to support students in learning specific concepts

Personal tutor

AI tutors each student

ChatGPT provides personalised

Co-designer

and provides immediate and actionable feedback on their progress

AI assists in the

learning design process

feedback to students based on learning analytics provided by students or
teachers (e.g., test scores)

Teachers ask ChatGPT for ideas on designing or updating a curriculum
(e.g., rubrics for assessment) and/or accomplishing specific learning
goals (e.g., how to make the curriculum more accessible)

Exploratorium

AI provides tools to

Teachers provide basic

research, explore, and interpret data

information to students who use ChatGPT to explore the topic in more
detail. ChatGPT can also be used to support language learning

(continued)

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

137

Table 10.1 (continued)

Role

Description

Example of implementation

Study buddy

AI helps the student

reflect on the learning material

Students explain their current level of understanding to ChatGPT and ask
for ways to help them study the material. ChatGPT could also be used to
help students prepare for other tasks (e.g., job interviews)

Motivator

AI offers games and

Teachers or students ask

challenges to extend learning

Dynamic assessor

AI provides educators

with a profile of each student’s current knowledge on a particular topic

ChatGPT for ideas on how to extend students’ learning after providing a
summary of the current level of knowledge (e.g., quizzes, exercises)

Students interact with ChatGPT in a tutorial-type dialogue in order to
produce a summary of their current state of knowledge. This is then
shared with their teacher/assessor

HE environments. Additional reﬁnements to the personalisation process
occur during tokenisation,1 where text is converted into smaller units
in order to make the chatbots more efﬁcient and effective (Bhartiya et
al., 2019). Once trained and generating responses with a high level of
reli- ability, developers continue to monitor the chatbot’s performance
and provide iterative training to ensure that it is functioning smoothly
and providing accurate information. Moreover, Tsivitanidou and Ioannou
(2021) considers the potential of chatbots to support certain types of
learning scenarios in HE.

In their guidelines, Chocarro et al. (2023) explain the desirability of
empowering teaching and administrative staff to effectively use AI, even
as its use continues to face questions regarding user digital literacy,
ethics, data privacy, and how these tools impact current pedagogical
strategies.

is the process of transforming a sequence of characters

1 Tokenisation into a collection of distinct tokens. In the realm of
computer science, tokens encompass a variety of elements, including
words, integers, identiﬁers, special characters, and punctuation marks
(Bhartiya et al., 2019).

138

M. Romero et al.

It

is essential that a comprehensive artiﬁcial

intelligence training program for university students and staff includes
learning skills related to using, developing, and is crucial at various
levels:

implementing chatbots. This

inclusion

– Problem Identiﬁcation: Universities should support the pedagogical
empowerment and the AI acculturation of operational staff to identify
opportunities and problems that can be facilitated using chatbots. –
Theoretical/Practical Framework: Universities should provide assis- in
the creation and development of chatbot-based assisted

tance learning scenarios based on the needs of educators and learners.

– Ubiquitousness: Universities should ensure that the use of chatbots is
democratised, widespread, and reﬂective of the latest technological and
training iterations.

– Practical use: Universities should assist students in learning the
skills necessary to seamlessly integrate chatbots into their learning
environ- ment.

– Assessment: Universities should continuously assess and reﬁne their
chatbot training models following a holistic set of quality standards.

When contemplating the implications associated with the develop- ment
and application of chatbots in educational settings, educators have the
responsibility to consider the role biases play in their usage and
development. For instance, tokenisation, a key aspect in data
processing, requires careful attention to mitigate instances of
information biases and to ensure that the chatbots maintain a
pedagogical perspective. Ensuring that the tokenisation of data is
executed without bias is imperative, as it directly impacts the
effectiveness, accuracy, fairness, and equity of the educational
experience as facilitated by the chatbot (Akter et al., 2021).
Furthermore, educators must advocate for the availability of chatbot
APIs capable of seamlessly functioning in different languages, thereby
linguistic diversity (Mogavi fostering inclusivity and accommodating et
al., 2023).

Finally, the shift in AI chatbots development APIs to no-code and low-
code, especially OpenAI’s GPTs in November 2022 (Lim et al., 2023),
marks a signiﬁcant milestone in democratising chatbot development for

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

139

education. This shift has a notable impact on the development and use of
chatbots as it allows individuals to create their own customised AI
tools without having extensive knowledge of software development or
programming. In the context of educational use cases, this removes many
of the signiﬁcant barriers preventing educators from leveraging their
unique expertise and training in the creation of their own AI tools.

Responsible Use of Generative AI Tools in Academia

In November 2022, OpenAI made ChatGPT publicly available for free,
employing the highly advanced GPT-3 model as its backbone Large Language
model (LLM). By January 2023, OpenAI announced that ChatGPT had
accumulated over 100 million users, setting a new global record as the
fastest-growing application to date (Lim et al., 2023). The exponential
growth of ChatGPT had a signiﬁcant impact on the education sector, as
students and educators around the world began exploring the app’s novel
functionalities. Delivered through an intu- itive and user-friendly
chatbot interface, ChatGPT’s text translation, question-answering (Q&A),
and text generation capabilities introduced new opportunities and
challenges to modern learning and teaching values, norms, and
methodologies. This development has been met with mixed reactions from
the educational community, prompting educa- tional institutions
worldwide to establish ad hoc committees of experts tasked with revising
their ethical frameworks, guidelines, and recommen- dations concerning
the use of Generative AI (GAI) in education and pedagogy.

Russell Group universities provide a comprehensive framework dedi- cated
to promoting the ethical and responsible utilisation of GAI tools within
academic settings. These institutions are steadfast in their commitment
to following established guidelines for the ethical use of AI tools in
education, as outlined by the principles set forth by the Russell Group.
This commitment involves fostering AI literacy among both students and
staff and empowering educators as they guide students in the effective
and responsible use of generative AI tools. Additionally,

140

M. Romero et al.

the Russell Group universities actively engage in reviewing and adapting
curriculum, teaching methods, and assessment practices to seamlessly
integrate the ethical use of generative AI and ensure equitable access
for all. This commitment extends to upholding academic rigour and
integrity, while also fostering collaboration with other institutions to
share best practices in response to the evolving technological landscape
and its educational applications.

References

Akcora, D. E., Belli, A., Berardi, M., Casola, S., Di Blas, N.,
Falletta, S., Faraotti, A., Lodi, L., Diaz, D. N., Paolini, P., Renzi,
F., & Vannella, F. (2018, June 27–30). Conversational support for
education. In Artiﬁcial intelligence in education: 19th International
Conference. AIED 2018, London, UK, 2018, Proceedings, Part II 19
(pp. 14–19). Springer.

Akter, S., McCarthy, G., Sajib, S., Michael, K., Dwivedi, Y. K.,
D’Ambra, J., & Shen, K. N. (2021). Algorithmic bias in data-driven
innovation in the age of AI. International Journal of Information
Management, 60, 102387.

Baidoo-Anu, D., & Ansah, L. O. (2023). Education in the era of
generative artiﬁcial intelligence (AI): Understanding the potential
beneﬁts of ChatGPT in promoting teaching and learning. Journal of AI, 7
(1), 52–62.

Bhartiya, N., Jangid, N., Jannu, S., Shukla, P., & Chapaneri, R. (2019,
July). Artiﬁcial neural network based university chatbot system. In 2019
IEEE Bombay Section Signature Conference (IBSSC) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.

Chan, C. K. Y. (2023). A comprehensive AI policy education framework for
university teaching and learning. International Journal of Educational
Technology in Higher Education, 20 (1), 38.

Chocarro, R., Cortiñas, M., & Marcos-Matás, G. (2023). Teachers’
attitudes towards chatbots in education: A technology acceptance model
approach considering the effect of social language, bot proactiveness,
and users’ characteristics. Educational Studies, 49 (2), 295–313.

Cooper, G. (2023). Examining science education in ChatGPT: An
exploratory study of generative artiﬁcial intelligence. Journal of
Science Education and Technology, 32(3), 444–452.

European Commission. (2019). Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI .
https://dig

ital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

141

Hamilton, M. L., Smith, L., & Worthington, K. (2009). Fitting the
method- ology with the research: An exploration of narrative, self-study
and auto- ethnography. Studying Teacher Education, 4 (1), 17–28.
https://doi.org/10. 1080/17425960801976321

Hwang, G.-J., & Chang, C.-Y. (2021). A review of opportunities and chal-
lenges of chatbots in education. Interactive Learning Environments.
https:// doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.1952615

Ingvarsdóttir, H., & Arnbjörnsdóttir, B. (2013). ELF and academic
writing: A perspective from the expanding circle. Journal of English as
a Lingua Franca, 2(1), 123–145.

Laux, J., Wachter, S., & Mittelstadt, B. (2023). Trustworthy artiﬁcial
intelli- gence and the European Union AI act: On the conﬂation of
trustworthiness and acceptability of risk. Regulation & Governance, 18,
3–32.

Lee, U., Jung, H., Jeon, Y., Sohn, Y., Hwang, W., Moon, J., & Kim, H.
(2023). Few-shot is enough: Exploring ChatGPT prompt engineering method
for automatic question generation in English education. Educa- tion and
Information Technologies, 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-
023-12249-8

Lim, W. M., Gunasekara, A., Pallant, J. L., Pallant, J. I., &
Pechenkina, E. (2023). Generative AI and future of education: Ragnarök
or the reformation? A paradoxical perspective from management educators.
The International Journal of Management Education, 21(2), 100790.

Lo, C. K. (2023). What is the impact of ChatGPT on education? A rapid
review of the literature. Education Sciences, 13(4), 410. MDPI AG.
https:// doi.org/10.3390/educsci13040410

Maher, S., Kayte, S., & Nimbhore, S. (2020). Chatbots & its techniques
using AI: A review. International Journal for Research in Applied
Science and Engineering Technology, 8(12), 503–508.

Mogavi, R. H., Deng, C., Kim, J. J., Zhou, P., Kwon, Y. D., Metwally, A.
H. S., Tlili, A., Bassanelli, S., Bucchiarone, A., Gujar, S., Nacke, L.
E., & Hui, P. (2023). ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A
qualitative study exploring early adopters’ utilization and perceptions.
Computers in Human Behavior: Artiﬁcial Humans, 100027. ISSN 2949-8821.
https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.chbah.2023.100027

Okonkwo, C. W., & Ade-Ibijola, A. (2021). Chatbots applications in
educa- tion: A systematic review. Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 2, 100033.

OpenAI. (2023). Enterprise privacy. OpenAI. Retrieved November 22, 2023

from https://openai.com/enterprise-privacy

142

M. Romero et al.

Ouyang, F., Wu, M., Zheng, L., Zhang, L., & Jiao, P. (2023). Integration
of artiﬁcial intelligence performance prediction and learning analytics
to improve student learning in online engineering course. International
Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 20 (1), 1–23.

Qadir, J. (2023). Engineering education in the era of ChatGPT: Promise
and pitfalls of generative AI for education. In 2023 IEEE global
Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON) (pp. 1–9). IEEE.

Rath, S., Pattanayak, A., Tripathy, S., Priyadarshini, S. B. B.,
Tripathy, A., & Tanvi, S. (2023). Prediction of a novel Rule-Based
Chatbot Approach (RCA) using natural language processing techniques.
International Journal of Intelligent Systems and Applications in
Engineering, 11(3), 318–325.

Rudolph, J., Tan, S., & Tan, S. (2023). ChatGPT: Bullshit spewer or the
end of traditional assessments in higher education? Journal of Applied
Learning and Teaching, 6 (1).

Sabzalieva, E., & Valentini, A. (2023). ChatGPT and artiﬁcial
intelligence in

higher education: Quick start guide. UNESCO.

Septiani, D. P., Kostakos, P., & Romero, M. (2023, July). Analysis of
creative engagement in AI tools in education based on the# PPai6
framework. In International conference in methodologies and intelligent
systems for technology enhanced learning (pp. 48–58). Springer.

Southworth, J., Migliaccio, K., Glover, J., Reed, D., McCarty, C.,
Brendemuhl, J., & Thomas, A. (2023). Developing a model for AI across
the curriculum: Transforming the higher education landscape via
innovation in AI literacy. Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 4, 100127.

Suhaili, S. M., Salim, N., & Jambli, M. N. (2021). Service chatbots: A

systematic review. Expert Systems with Applications, 184, 115461.

Tsivitanidou, O., & Ioannou, A. (2021, July). Envisioned pedagogical
uses of chatbots in higher education and perceived beneﬁts and
challenges. In International conference on human-computer interaction
(pp. 230–250). Springer.

Weizenbaum, J. (1966). ELIZA—A computer program for the study of natural
language communication between man and machine. Communications of the
ACM, 9 (1), 36–45.

Younis, H. A., Ruhaiyem, N. I. R., Ghaban, W., Gazem, N. A., & Nasser,
M. (2023). A systematic literature review on the applications of robots
and natural language processing in education. Electronics, 12(13), 2864.

10 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education

143

is

licensed under

Open Access This chapter the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if
changes were made.

in any medium or format, as

terms of

the

The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in
the chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.


