A Long Journey into Reproducible Computational
Neuroscience
Meropi Topalidou, Arthur Leblois, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Meropi Topalidou, Arthur Leblois, Thomas Boraud, Nicolas P. Rougier. A Long Journey into
Reproducible Computational Neuroscience. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 2015, pp.2.
￿10.3389/fncom.2015.00030￿. ￿hal-01117873￿

HAL Id: hal-01117873

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01117873

Submitted on 5 Mar 2015

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

A Long Journey into Reproducible Computational Neuroscience 
Meropi Topalidou1,2,3,4, Arthur Leblois5, Thomas Boraud2,3, and Nicolas P. Rougier1,2,3,4,\* 

1 INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Bordeaux, France 2 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, Université de Bordeaux, UMR 
5293, Bordeaux, France 3 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, UMR 
5293, Bordeaux, France 4 LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, Institut Polytechnique de Bordeaux, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientiﬁque, UMR 5800, Talence, France 5 Centre de Neurophysique, Physiologie et Pathologies, Université Paris 
Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, UMR 8119, Paris, France \* Corresponding author. 

Computational neuroscience is a powerful ally in our quest to understand the brain. Even the most 
simple model can shed light on the role of this or that structure and propose new hypothesis 
concerning the overall brain organization. However, any model in Science is doomed to be proved 
wrong or incomplete and replaced by a more accurate one. In the meantime, for such replacement to 
happen, we have ﬁrst to make sure that models are actually reproducible such that they can be 
tested, evaluated, criticized and ultimately modiﬁed, replaced or even rejected. This is where the shoe 
pinches. If we cannot reproduce a model in the ﬁrst place, we're doomed to re-invent the wheel again 
and again, preventing us from building an incremental computational knowledge of the brain. 

We have been recently confronted to the problem when we tried to reproduce a model of the literature 
(Guthrie et al., 2013) concerning a computational model of the basal ganglia. This model was based 
on a previous modelling study by (Leblois et al., 2006) where authors proposed an action selection 
mechanism based on a competition between the positive feedback, direct pathway through the 
striatum and the negative feedback, hyperdirect pathway through the subthalamic nucleus. Guthrie et 
al. (2013) further investigated how multiple level action selection could be performed, and the model 
has been extended in a manner consistent with known anatomy and electrophysiology of the basal 
ganglia in the monkey. The model is quite complex, but such is the basal ganglia. We asked authors 
for the sources of the model only to realize it has been implemented using 6000 lines of Delphi (Pascal 
language). We were unable to compile it (due to missing packages that we couldn’t locate in any 
repository) and we thus decided to recode it from scratch. Unfortunately, the information provided in 
the article was not sufﬁcient to allow for the direct reproduction of the model, mainly because there 
were factual errors in the manuscript and some information was ambiguous or missing. Ultimately, we 
were able to reach two of the original authors,T. Boraud and A. Leblois (who are also authors of this 
commentary) in order to ask them about the details of the model. We joined efforts and proceeded 
with a complete rewrite, using the Python language (Perkel, 2015), a dedicated library (DANA), a 
versioning system (git), a public repository (github) and the IPython notebook, merely following the 
principles of reproducible computational science as proposed in (Peng, 2011; Sandve et al., 
2013; Stodden et al., 2014). We also established the tabular description of the model as proposed in 
(Nordlie et al., 2009). We contend this revamped model now allows any researcher in computational 
neuroscience to run it and to obtain the exact same results as the ones described in the original article 
(see https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01109483 for complete description and https://github.com/rougier/
Neurosciences/tree/master/basal-ganglia/guthrie-et-al-2013 for source code). Furthermore, the 
new description, as well as the new ﬁgures, allow anyone to rewrite the model using a different 
language, tools or software. 

However, the whole process took us approximately three months. This is hardly acceptable for the 
reproduction of a computational model that should be straightforward. 

Unfortunately, this is not an isolated case. If computer science offers a large set of tools for 
prototyping, writing, running, testing, validating, sharing and reproducing results, computational 
neuroscience still lags behind. In the best case, authors may provide the sources of their model as a 
compressed archive and feel conﬁdent their model is reproducible. But this is not exactly true. 
Buckheit and Donoho (1995) explained almost 20 years ago that, “an article about computational 
result is advertising, not scholarship. The actual scholarship is the full software environment, code and 
data that produced the result”. The computational part in computational sciences implies the use of 
computers, operating systems, tools, frameworks, libraries and data. This  leads to such a large 

number of combinations (taking into account the version for each components) that the chances to 
have the exact same conﬁguration as one of your colleague are nearly zero. This draws 
consequences in our  respective computational approaches in order to make sure models and 
simulations can be actually and faithfully reproduced. We have to enforce the rules proposed in the 
literature and editors have to make sure this actually happens. From a broader perspective, this 
singular experience raises also some questions about the whole publication process. If articles remain 
the best media to publish a research and to introduce a model, why can’t we have associated 
resources for the actual code just like we can have supplementary material as a separate document? 
For example, it is quite surprising that there is still no ofﬁcial code repository associated with journals. 
Even a dedicated public account on github (or any similar website) would really help on this matter. 

But more importantly, given the quality of the new tools available today, it may be time to envisage 
new formats for communicating computational researches. For example, interactive documents could 
allow to replay a simulation and to modify parameters while reading the description of a model or a 
simulation. The IPython notebook is a serious candidate in that direction and could soon become a 
new way to exchange knowledge. It has been recently highlighted on Nature (Shen, 2014) and it is 
already widely used for teaching and writing books. Such new formats would deﬁnitely help authors, 
reviewers, readers and ultimately, Science. 

References 

1. M. Guthrie, A. Leblois, A. Garenne, and T. Boraud. Interaction between cognitive and motor cortico-basal 
ganglia loops during decision making: a computational study. Journal of Neurophysiology, 109:3025–3040, 
2013. 

2. A. Leblois, T. Boraud, W. Meissner, H. Bergman, and D. Hansel. Competition between feedback loops 
underlies normal and pathological dynamics in the basal ganglia. Journal of Neurosciences, 26:3567–3583, 
2006. 

3. R.D. Peng. Reproducible research in computational science. Science, 334(6060):1226–1227, 2011. 

4. G.K. Sandve, A. Nekrutenko, J. Taylor, and E. Hovig. Ten simple rules for reproducible computational 
research. PLoS Computational Biology, 9(10):e1003285, 2013. doi: doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003285. 

5. V. Stodden, F. Leisch, and R.D. Peng, editors. Implementing Reproducible Research. Chapman & Hall/CRC, 

2014. 

6. Jeffrey M. Perkel. Programming: Pick-Up Python. Nature 518, 125–126, 2015. 

7. E. Nordlie, M. Gewaltig, and H.E. Plesser. Towards reproducible descriptions of neuronal network models. 

PLoS Computational Biology, 5(8):e1000456, 2009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000456. 

8. J. Buckheit and D.L. Donoho. Wavelets and Statistics, chapter Wavelab and reproducible research. 

Antoniadis, A., 1995. 

9. Helen Shen. Interactive notebooks: Sharing the code. Nature, (515):151–152, 2014.

