Decision making mechanisms in a connectionist model of the basal ganglia

M. Guthrie1,2, C. Héricé1,2, R. Khalil2, M. Moftah3, T. Boraud1,2, A.
Garenne1,2 1 Université Bordeaux-Segalen, UMR 5293, Institut des
Maladies Neurodegeneratives, Bordeaux, France. 2 CNRS, UMR 5293,
Institut des Maladies Neurodegeneratives, Bordeaux, France 3 Zoology
Department, Faculty of Science, Alexandria University, 21151,
Alexandria, Egypt

Introduction Basal ganglia (BG) are known to hosts mechanisms of action
selection and its adaptation to a changing environment. Their
architecture consist of several parallel functional loops connecting
back to distinct areas of cortex (motor, cognitive and limbic) and
processing different modalities of decision making. The picture of
parallel loops is complicated by convergence and divergence that implies
that the various loops are interacting. A previous BG model was
developed by Martin Guthrie. This model was built of interacting
bloc-diagram based on rate-models and it was able to learn optimized
action selection during a probabilistic reward task. The aim of the
present work is to refine and extend these results to a cell-synapse
level through a bottom-up approach. This should allow us to: 1. 
highlight structure-function relationship and circuitry emerging
properties 2.  Investigate cell-scale mechanisms impact on the whole
model capacities (learning and decision-making)

Material and Method Behavioral task

Implementation

4 target shapes are associated with different reward probabilities. At
each trial, 2 targets, randomly chosen among the 4, are presented in
random positions.

A choice is made by the model and the reward is given or not according
to its own reward probability (probabilistic learning task).

The model aim is to learn to choose the optimum target on each trial,
which is the target with the higher probability of reward.

Figure 2. Task design**

Figure 1. Overview of model architecture*.

Network architecture The model is designed in a manner consistent with
known anatomy and electrophysiology in three main areas. Each neuron is
implemented by a leaky integrate-and-fire model:

Vm t( ) Rm Each subpopulation is composed of a cell assembly which size
is related to the respective cell ratios. Learning is modeled as an
increase in cortico-striatal cognitive projections (synaptic
plasticity).

dVm t( ) dt

= I t( )

Cm ⋅

-   

€

Figure 3. Modeling tool java implementation

A

B

C

Figure 4. Model pathways. A) Direct pathway. B) Hyperdirect pathway. C)
Pathway crosstalk

Results Global network properties A manual tuning of the strength of the
different projections has provided a model which is robust to noise and
consistent regarding (i) the average and relative levels of activity of
each cell assembly and (ii) the interactions between each subpopulation.
Feed-forward inhibition and action selection Thanks to the architecture
and the noise, the model spontaneously selects an action (defined here
by the highest motor cortex activity) which breaks the symmetry. During
this “exploration” phase, the naïve network selects motor alternative
with equal probabilities.

Figure 5. Cortical sub- populations recordings (Hz)

0  

10  

90  

40  

30  

80  

50  

70  

20  

60  

100  

f o

%

e h t

*  

s l a i r t

s e u l a v

n e s o h c

g n i r u d

Cognitive bias of motor selection The symmetry breaking occurs with
equal probabilities regarding the motor and cognitive activation in a
naïve model but with a superior probability for motor-cognitive coupled
pairs. Discussion The neural network implementation of a BG stochastic
model is developed, embedded in a sensory-motor closed-loop environment
and applied to an action-selection task. This neuron level description
model allows for a better understanding of the information flows
dynamics in the BG and for an investigation of the physiopathological
models including synapses, cells and neuromodulators properties. To
achieve this study two steps have to be reached: - role of the cognitive
bias on action selection as a function of learnt reward values. -
implementation of a dopamine modulated STDP to reproduce a complete
learning process with a bottom-up and model-free paradigm.

Figure 6. Average of chosen values

C1&C5  OR   C2&C7  

C7  

C1  

C5  

C2  

* Guthrie et al, 2013

** Pasquereau et al, 2007


