Implicit knowledge extraction and structuration from
electrical diagrams
Ikram Chraibi Kaadoud, Nicolas P. Rougier, Frédéric Alexandre

To cite this version:

Ikram Chraibi Kaadoud, Nicolas P. Rougier, Frédéric Alexandre. Implicit knowledge extraction and
structuration from electrical diagrams. 2016. ￿hal-01525015v2￿

HAL Id: hal-01525015

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01525015v2

Preprint submitted on 22 May 2017

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial 4.0 International License

Implicit knowledge extraction and structuration
from electrical diagrams

Ikram Chraibi Kaadoud1,2,3,4, Nicolas Rougier2,3,4, and Frederic Alexandre2,3,4

(1) Algo’Tech Informatique, Technopole Izarbel, Bidart
(2) INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France
(3) LaBRI, UMR 5800, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, Talence, France
(4) Institut des Maladies Neurod´eg´en´eratives, UMR 5293, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientiﬁque, Universit´e de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
{ikram.chraibi-kaadoud,nicolas.rougier,frederic.alexandre}@inria.fr

Abstract. The electrical domain, either domestic or industrial, beneﬁts
from a huge set of well-deﬁned norms at both the national and interna-
tional levels. However and surprisingly enough, there is no such norm
regarding the actual conception and structuration of electrical diagrams,
even though the basic symbols and notations remain the same. Each
company is actually free to design such diagram relative to its own ex-
perience, expertise and know-how. The diﬃculty is that such diagrams,
which are most of the time materialized as a PDF booklet, do not reﬂect
this implicit knowledge. In this paper, we introduce our work on the ex-
traction and the structuration of such knowledge using ad-hoc graph and
text analysis as well as clustering techniques. Starting from a set of raw
documents, we propose an end-to-end solution that oﬀers a structured
view, which is company dependent, of any electrical diagram for a given
company.

Keywords: Knowledge extraction, knowledge representation, hierarchi-
cal clustering, knowledge structuration, electrical diagrams

1

Introduction

The electrical domain, either domestic or industrial, beneﬁts from a huge set of
well deﬁned norms at both the national and international levels. These norms
have to be enforced when designing a new electrical diagram and to be enforced
as well during the actual physical construction of the circuit. In that regards,
electrical workers are generally given a booklet describing the overall circuit even
though this diagram has to be split into several subparts such that each subpart
ﬁts on a regular A4 sheet paper. This arbitrary and constrained segmentation
of the whole diagram implies a graph structure that does not follow the logical
structure of the underlying object. It is indeed quite similar to the decomposi-
tion of an image into pixels sharing no similarities with the inner structure of
the image. The problem we are interested in this paper is to ﬁnd original meth-
ods for discovering the implicit structure of electrical diagrams using the PDF
description.

2

Knowledge extraction and structuration

In this context, we are working with a software company, Algo’Tech Informa-
tique, that provides a set of specialized tools for the design of electrical diagrams.
These tools are able to provide a synthetic view of any electrical diagram and
to produce the corresponding booklet. To do so, whenever Algo’Tech informa-
tique has a new customer, it gets existing electrical diagrams of the customer,
to analyse them and adapt the database of their softwares. Furthemore, if cus-
tomers want to ﬁnd back their concepts and vocabulary into the new electrical
diagrams once they are generated by Algo’Tech informatique’s softwares, cus-
tomers are also mostly interested to ﬁnd their ”footprints”, their way of drawing
and to dispose electrical components inside a circuit. The customers experts
have indeed the ability to recognize the work of their company whenever they
see it, and they are attached to continue to have it. Concretely, the diﬀerence
between the schema of a company A and the schema of a company B, that both
represent the same circuit, will lies mainly in the conﬁguration of the electrical
components in a sheet. To extract the footprints, Algo’Tech Informatique has to
review the internal arrangement of electrical components into each page of each
electrical diagram (on PDFs) and to compare the arrangements between them to
ﬁnd similarities. Thus, this work results from an extensive and non-automated
collaboration between the software company and the customer. It is also time-
consuming and informal (and not stricly replicable) in the sense that it results
from non constrained interviews between humans. Hence, to get this company-
speciﬁc synthetic view, Algo’Tech informatique experts face two challenges : the
ﬁrst one is to understand the reasoning and planning process of electrical di-
agrams by their customers in order to formalize it. The second challenge is to
make the customer’s experts explain their work, which is often the case with
implicit knowledge. So, the work of expertise extraction is a diﬃcult work since
it needs to support experts in the exploration of their own habits and knowledge.
It is also often the opportunity, during this process, to realise a review of the
expertise by itself, by validating or not some actions experts used to do and to
put in place new processes. Consequently, we aim for an automatic knowledge
extraction process speciﬁc to a customer and based on its past projects (which
are generally materialized as a restricted set of scanned PDF booklets). However,
such documents mix texts and diagrams and this is what makes them diﬃcult
to analyze even though they also possess their own local structure that we can
take advantage of as we will explain in this article. Our goal on the long term
is to help Algo’Tech company in its work of customers expertise extraction and
formalization inside its own softwares that will assist the designer in her or his
work of designing new diagrams.

In this paper we propose two approaches for knowledge extraction and rep-
resentation in order to describe in a more explicit way electrical diagrams with
respect to the work and drawing habits of the owner company, but also with
respect to the mental representation of the technical diagram designer. In this
regards, concretely, we ﬁrst suggest, in the following section a review of exist-
ing works in technical diagrams exploration. Then, in section 3, we describe the
knowledge extraction process we developed to transform every raw data stuck

Knowledge extraction and structuration

3

into the PDF booklets, into explicit, usable and relevant information. Then, in
section 4, we detail a content approach related to the electrical components, that
aims to put in light the footprints of customers using a data mining solution.
We conclude by discussing our approaches and the next steps of our work.

2 Review of existing work

2.1 Technical documents analysis

The capitalization of the knowledge of technical documents is a real problem
in the industry. From one hand, the ﬁeld of analysis of technical documents,
which has been investigated for several years, in many kinds of domains like
mechanical engineering, city maps, hand-drawn ﬁgures, geographical maps and
electrical circuitry, is mostly focused on image analysis and recognition [1]. On
the other hand, there is a great deal of works in the ﬁeld of document analysis,
including PDFs, in order to retrieve the text content from these documents, but
again, that leaves aside the graphical content of these documents [2]. However
in the domain of technical diagrams, both of these elements, text content and
image content, are important for the understanding and the interpretation of
documents.

Another ﬁeld that didn’t receive a lot of attention (compared to symbol
recognition by computer vision for example) is the ﬁeld of diagram interpre-
tation. The identiﬁcation of the structure in a diagram, the semantics of its
constituents and their relationship, is almost always domain-speciﬁc. Recently,
[3] focuses on the problem of diagram interpretation and reasoning, also deﬁned
as syntactic parsing (detection of the constituents and their syntaxic relation-
ships in a diagram) and semantic interpretation (tasks of mapping constituents
and their relationships to semantic entities or real-word concepts) in order to
propose a global approach of the diagrams, regardless of the domain. However,
the approach beneﬁts and actually exploits a huge dataset. More precisely, it
exploits a deep learning algorithm that learns on a basis of 5,000 diagrams, a
size one order of magnitude bigger than our 160 PDF booklets that we are cur-
rently analysing plus the 500 ones that we would like to test. This is the main
reason that makes us to look for an innovative solution to analyse small volume
of electrical diagrams, without using standard methods.

2.2 Expertise extraction

Another problem that industry faces is the capitalization of the knowledge ex-
pertise. Such knowledge is represented implicitly through several documents, and
represents an intellectual capital resulting from the knowledge and the experi-
ence from the collaborators and/or the experts. Using many diﬀerent methods,
companies try to collect and disseminate such expertise to all the employees,
so that they can take advantage from it. But even then, the challenge is still
complex because of the experts mental representation of their work. Indeed, [4]

4

Knowledge extraction and structuration

demonstrated the existence of expert-novice diﬀerences in mental representation
using a series of drawing tasks. [4] conﬁrmed that experts represent given infor-
mation in a domain-speciﬁc manner, concerned with the deep semantic structure
of that information, whereas novices, in their mental representations, focus upon
superﬁcial domain-general aspects. These results were conﬁrmed by [5] who also
asserted that for one given ﬁeld, the novice experts have a rather verbatim-
type conceptualization, which means detailed, analytical, controlled, low-level
concepts, whereas senior experts have a conceptualization rather of gist-type,
more fuzzy, conceptual, intuitive, using prototypes and high level concepts. This
means that according to the level of expertise, the mental representation of a
technical diagram is not the same. For example, if a novice sees geometric forms
on a paper sheet, he will recognize shapes like ”square” or ”triangle”, whereas
an expert may describe them as series of pixels (or tiny dots) of varying shades
arranged to form the image of a ”square” or a ”triangle”. There is thus diﬀerent
ways to describe diagrams : through the explicit structured data and through
the implicit structure or mental representation of the experts.

In the following section, we describe the knowledge extraction of raw data
using the titles and text into electrical diagrams (Figure 1, label A, B, C). From
this point, we will refer to Algo’Tech Informatique experts as experts, and we
will precise in other cases.

3 First approach : Extraction and representation of raw

data into concepts

The knowledge discovery of data (KDD) process was described by [6] as the
process of discovering useful knowledge from data. Iterative and interactive, it
involves many steps with many users decisions. In the present work, we chose to
follow those steps with one speciﬁc goal : to put in light the implicit structure
hidden in diﬀerent kinds of electrical diagrams.

3.1 Raw data : the electrical diagrams in PDFs and DXFs ﬁles

Companies that draw electrical diagrams have to deal mostly with two type of
ﬁles : the PDF ones, the most commonly used type, and the Autodesk’s DXF
format ones, the only format with open access that can be handled by almost
every Computer-aided design (CAD) system [7]. In this section, we describe how
we process these kinds of ﬁles.

Electrical diagrams on PDFs ﬁles According to the complexity of the
circuit represented in the diagram, it can take hundreds of pages to represent
only one electrical diagram. Usually the document has a title, a list of pages,
and thus, the circuit that goes through many pages, as in Figure 1. In each
of them (named ”folio”) there are three important elements: First, the schema
(the electrical diagram), second, the equipment and the electrical components
(symbols of motors, power, security, etc.) and third, the text (folio’s title, its

Knowledge extraction and structuration

5

number (diﬀerent from the page number), the equipment names, voltage indi-
cations and indications toward other folios). In the majority of the folios, there
are indications to other folios: these pieces of information are important because
they are the relations between diﬀerent folios according to the wiring cables. For
example, on the power equipment folio, there will be the number of the motor
equipment folio and conversely. Hence, from the ﬁrst folio containing the start
of the schema and by following the folios indications on every folio, it is pos-
sible to extract the electrical diagram. In this paper, we chose to focus on the
exploitation of the text extracted from an electrical diagram, because we want
to explore the semantic value of text for knowledge representation and reasoning
process. The PDF ﬁles are important : it is by using the folios indications, the
folios titles and the folios number, that we realise the ﬁrst approach described
in the current section.

Electrical diagrams on DXFs ﬁles DXF, for Drawing Interchange For-
mat, or Drawing Exchange Format, is a CAD data ﬁle that enables data interop-
erability between many CAD softwares. It is considered an open access format
because it is basicaly an ASCII ﬁle that can be read by text editors and that
is organized by sections (HEADER, BLOCKS, ENTITIES, etc.). A DXF ﬁle is
thus an ASCII translation of a drawing ﬁle : by analysing the blocks and their
attributes, it is possible to extract data and meta-data (coordinates, attributes,
block name, etc.) related to electrical components. If the extracted text from a
folio of a PDF allows us to get the name of an electrical component for example,
the DXF processing allows us to get its x, y coordinates inside that folio. It is
this information that allows us to process the content approach that we are going
to describe in section 4. Hence, the alliance of PDF analysis and DXF analysis
enables a quasi-complete analysis of electrical diagram and a more exhaustive
interpretation without having to deal with computer vision or image recognition
techniques and issues.

3.2 Knowledge extraction and representation process using graphs

We propose in this subsection diﬀerent ways to represent an electrical diagram.
If we consider a list of folios describing a wiring diagram, it indicates a linear
approach of the diagram (one folio by one folio). But in reality, the electrical
diagram is more complex than this : there are many cable pathways. So the
review and analysis of previous electrical diagrams of one customer, which is
mainly manual, can take a lot of time and may generate misinterpretations. We
present below the approach that we chose to enable a quick browsing of the
electrical diagrams in order to get the concepts of the customer’s job, its ways
of drawing but also a quick detection of particular cases or mistakes. Among
all the texts extracted from electrical diagrams, we focused on the folios title,
the folios number and the folios indications (Figure 1, label A and B). In the
ﬁeld of electrical diagrams, there are global standards for symbols that represent
components and inside each company, internal standards about the naming. So
technical diagram designers have to follow explicit conventions to name folios.
We thus chose to analyse these elements as a starting point of our KDD process.

6

Knowledge extraction and structuration

Transform a diagram into a graph While reading an electrical diagram,
the expert has to follow the folio’s indication (Figure 1, label C) in order to
navigate between folios. In that regard, the ﬁrst challenge is to sail from an
electrical circuit portion to another in order to build a ﬁrst, global and abstract
representation of the electrical diagram. Since PDF booklets have diﬀerent size,
this work can be very complex. Our ﬁrst work was to transform a linear booklet
of many pages, into one single representation holding in one sheet. Mimicking
the expert’s reasoning, we used the following process to transform any electrical
diagram into a graph : for each folio of each diagram, we use the folio’s number
as the id of a node and the related folio’s title as the label of that node. Then,
we use the folio’s indication to establish links between nodes. We obtain thus a
graph representing the electrical diagram with a ﬁrst level of abstraction.

Get homogenized graphs After the previous step applied on several book-
lets, we obtain a set of graphs, each one representing one diagram, with its own
titles. Then, we worked on the titles in order to replace the nodes labels by a
limited set of words in order to get homogenized graphs from the vocabulary
point of view. For that, we analysed the titles to put in light the common words.
So, we extract all the words in the titles all booklets combined and compute an
intersection between them. In this way, we obtain a set of words that are com-
mon to all booklets. We will refer to these words as the concepts of the customer
: they are the concepts that are recurrent and present in all the projects of a
given customer. These concepts are thus essential to the business logic of the
customer. A collaboration with experts at this step is necessary to control the
concepts, and validate them. Once it is done, these concepts replace the original
nodes labels (the folio’s titles). Nodes having the same label get merged (but by
preserving the links) in order to have, at the end, one occurence of each label in
each graph. In this way, all the links are preserved, but the number of nodes have
been reduced, and labels of the nodes have been standardized. So the complexity
of the graphs has been reduced. We thus obtain, a ﬁrst local representation of
the knowledge present in each electrical diagram through homogenized graphs.

Getting the global graph of customer’s concepts The main goal for
experts while working and going into the analysis of each diagram is to under-
stand and extract the customer business expertise : Concepts, rules, standards,
etc. Once we get the set of standardized graphs, one step remains : making a
single view of the customer business logic. Since our graphs have the same labels,
we can merge them into one global graph of concepts by aggregating links or
nodes gradually. The global graph of concepts contains, thus, at the end of the
process, all the concepts that the customer have already used in his previous
electrical diagrams, and all the possible relations between these concepts. The
relations between nodes represent by their existence, a habit of work of the client
: indeed, if there is a link between concepts ”Equipment” and ”Power”, it does
not only mean that it is possible from a functionnal point of view, but also that
the customer, in his job, at least once put a folio’s indication (a link) between a
folio that belongs to the power concept and a folio that belongs to the equipment

Knowledge extraction and structuration

7

concept. At this point, the graph is a representation, at an abstract level, of the
knowledge of the customer.

In this ﬁrst part, we proposed a process to go from an electrical diagram,
raw data, to an abstract view of the customer’s knowledge that put in light
concepts and relations between them. This approach allows also to facilitate the
groupement of the folios of the same nature since that by doing the reverse path
(from the abstract view to the raw data), it is possible to group and analyse
folios according to the concept they belong to. This capacity to group folios
according to the concept will be used for the second approach.

Fig. 1. The organisation and content of a folio : A- the folio’s title, B- the folio’s
number, C- the folio’s indications, D- the electrical components

4 Second approach : Extraction of the footprint with

hierarchical clustering

4.1 A content approach through the electrical components

The second approach used for the analysis of the electrical diagram is a content
approach through the electrical components (Figure 1, label D). DXFs ﬁles give
us information about electrical components as a symbol drawn into a folio. One
important information is the x,y coordinates of the components. So for each fo-
lio of each electrical diagram, we extract a set of electrical components in order
to obtain as many sets as folios, all booklets combined. Since it is the internal
arrangement of components inside a folio that interrest us, we chose to order the
components inside each set, according to their growing x, y coordinates. We call
an order set a sequence : it is the formalisation of the internal arrangments into
a folio. Each sequence describing one folio. For example, in ﬁgure 1, the sequence
is Q100, Q101, Q102. It is an important notion for our work since it is inside a

8

Knowledge extraction and structuration

sequence that can be found a footprint of a customer. Studying electrical compo-
nents, made us also exchange with experts about their meaning and functions.
Together, we listed 25 families (categories) of electrical components, each one
composed by sub-families. These families are quite common in the global ﬁeld
of electrical diagrams: as they have been deﬁne once, they can be used for any
diagrams in the electrical ﬁeld. We use the sequences and the list of categories
for the building of our data sets and the data mining process described below.

4.2 The data mining process : Hierarchical clustering

In his description, [6] puts in light one element regarding the KDD process and
the data mining : the latter one is deﬁned as a step into the former one. Data
mining is not a KDD process by itself, but the application of a particular algo-
rithm in order to extract patterns from data. Indeed [8] deﬁned the KDD process
as 3 steps : a pre-processing step, a data mining step and a post-processing step.
Here is, below, our work according to these three steps.

Preprocessing Two treatments are done on the sequences : the creation of

data sets and their transformation.
First, considering all electrical diagrams, we group together the sequences that
belong to the same concept (common word) : it is the ﬁrst set of data, composed
by subsets, one for each concept. Second, considering again all electrical dia-
grams, we group together all the sequences, independently of the concept they
belong to. We thus create the second set of data. Finally, each sequence is trans-
lated into a binary vector of 25 units (since we listed 25 families of electrical
components), each indicating the presence or absence of an electrical category
into a folio.

Data mining Once the data prepared, we chose to apply a hierarchical clus-
tering method on the two sets in order, from one hand, to study, observe and
compare the clusters that appear, and from the other hand, to put in light the
footprint into the sequences. We get inspired by the work of [9], who use the
hierarchical cluster analysis to rebuild the grammar (set of rules and patterns)
from sequences. The hierarchical clustering is a method of cluster analysis which
seeks to build a hierarchy of clusters. It needs a distance metric (like ’euclidean’,
’hamming’ or ’jaccard’) and a linkage method that compute the distance between
two clusters. It starts with n individual samples considered as singleton clusters
and at each iteration, it merged the two clusters with the smallest distance un-
til only one remains. To choose the best combination ”distance metric-linkage
method”, it is advised to compute the Cophenetic correlation coeﬃcient. The
more its value is close to 1, the more the clustering preserves the original dis-
tances. The result can be graphically represented as a dendogram (the standard
representation) or as a cluster-tree (a graph) with folios as leafs and nodes as
clusters. For further technical details, please refer to [10].
In our work, on each set of data, we use the Jaccard distance and average linkage
method as parameters to our hierarchical clustering, since it was the combina-
tion that shows the better Cophenetic correlation coeﬃcient. For every sets and
subsets, we thus obtain a dendogram. The graphical result of this analysis on the

Knowledge extraction and structuration

9

second set of data (sequences from 3 electrical diagrams) is presented in Figure
2.

Post-Processing For every sets of vectors, each cluster obtained is described
as a binary vector corresponding to the union of the binary vectors of the previous
clusters. This work of identiﬁcation of clusters allowed to compare the clusters
obtained with the second data set, with clusters obtained with the ﬁrst data set :
Exception apart (folios which weren’t plot at the expected location), we found in
the cluster-tree of the second data set, all the cluster-trees of the ﬁrst data sets.
We thus realized that this approach allowed us to put in light particular cases
or mistakes in an electrical diagram, for example, when a folio (its sequence)
was ploted at an expected location. On top of that, the fact that we obtained
this results shows that there is indeed recurrence and regularities into the way
of working of a customer : it conﬁrms the existence of a footprint.

Fig. 2. A dendogram, a graphical representation of the hierarchical clustering of the
sequences of all electrical diagrams combined : numbers on the x axis identify the
sequences, whereas the numbers in the dendogram identify the distance.

5 Discussion

In this paper, we exposed two approaches we developped for knowledge extrac-
tion and representation in the ﬁeld of electrical diagrams. We ﬁrst described the
approach that create a global view of the customer business logic using graphs,
on the basis text extracted from electrical diagrams. By doing this, from one
hand, we showed that the exploitation of text from electrical diagrams allowed
us to unravel the concepts that are important for the customer. From the other
hand, we provided a graph representation that is accessible for both the experts
and for the novices such as external collaborators. The second approach aims
to spell implicit knowledge out from the internal arrangments of all the folios
electrical components. Using clustering analysis, we managed to detect and ex-
tract patterns from sets of data that represent customers footprints. These two
approaches complement each other in order to give a view of the electrical di-
agrams that assist, improve and accelerate experts analysis. In a more global

10

Knowledge extraction and structuration

dimension, we showed through our work, that each electrical diagram is an in-
stanciation of the customer knowledge from which it is possible reconstruct the
expertise knowledge as well as habits of work. The study of such habits is still an
ongoing work. In order to have the full picture, and to provide more assistance to
the experts, we are currently studying the electrical components sequences with
the hypothesis that such sequences held more information about the habits of
work for a given customer. Such sequences represents a small part of the global
knowledge as well as the drawing habit (the arrangements of components). To
explore this, we have used a neural network approach in order to discover the
”grammar” rules governing the sequence arrangement : the Elman model [9].
Our ﬁrst preliminary results indicates it is possible to learn and to predict as
long the sequence length is not too big. Tests and analysis are still on going and
alternatives, like other recurrent neural networks, are also considered.

On the medium term, as well as improving the expertise analysis and by
extend the tools that assists the designer in her or his work, we aim at showing
that there is an implicit dimension in the planing in every electrical diagrams as
it was shown in [11].

References

1. Antoine, D., Collin, S., Tombre, K.: Analysis of technical documents: The RE-
DRAW system. In: Structured document image analysis, pp. 385–402. Springer
(1992)

2. Futrelle, R.P., Shao, M., Cieslik, C., Grimes, A.E.: Extraction, layout analysis and
classiﬁcation of diagrams in PDF documents. In: ICDAR. vol. 3, pp. 1007–1014
(2003)

3. Kembhavi, A., Salvato, M., Kolve, E., Seo, M., Hajishirzi, H., Farhadi, A.: A

Diagram Is Worth A Dozen Images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.07396 (2016)

4. Lowe, R.K.: Constructing a mental representation from an abstract technical dia-

gram. Learning and Instruction 3(3), 157–179 (1993)

5. Aim´e, X., Charlet, J.: IC: Ing´enierie des Connaissances ou Ing´enierie du Con-
formisme? In: IC-24`emes Journ´ees francophones d’Ing´enierie des Connaissances
(2013)

6. Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P.: From data mining to knowledge

discovery in databases. AI magazine 17(3), 37 (1996)

7. Weber, N., Henrich, A.: Retrieval of technical drawings in DXF format-concepts

and problems. In: LWA. pp. 213–220. Citeseer (2007)

8. Ramos, S., Figueiredo, V., Rodrigues, F., Pinheiro, R., Vale, Z.: Knowledge ex-
traction from medium voltage load diagrams to support the deﬁnition of electrical
tariﬀs. Engineering Intelligent Systems for Electrical Engineering and Communi-
cations 15(3), 143–149 (2007)

9. Servan-Schreiber, D., Cleeremans, A., McClelland, J.L.: Encoding sequential struc-

ture in simple recurrent networks. Tech. rep., DTIC Document (1989)

J.:

10. Hees,
torial
scipy-hierarchical-clustering-and-dendrogram-tutorial/

Dendrogram Tu-
https://joernhees.de/blog/2015/08/26/

Hierarchical
2015),

Clustering

SciPy

(Aug

and

11. Cleeremans, A., McClelland, J.L.: Learning the structure of event sequences. Jour-

nal of Experimental Psychology: General 120(3), 235 (1991)

