Article Label-Free Study of the Global Cell Behavior during Exposure to
Environmental Radiofrequency Fields in the Presence or Absence of
Pro-Apoptotic or Pro-Autophagic Treatments

Alexandre Joushomme 1, André Garenne 1, Mélody Dufossée 2, Rémy Renom 1
, Hermanus Johannes Ruigrok 1, Yann Loick Chappe 1, Anne Canovi 1,
Lorenza Patrignoni 1, Annabelle Hurtier 1, Florence Poulletier de Gannes
1, Isabelle Lagroye 1,3, Philippe Lévêque 4, Noëlle Lewis 1, Muriel
Priault 2 and Yann Percherancier 1,*

, Delia Arnaud-Cormos 4,5

1 Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IMS/UMR 5218, F-33400 Talence, France;
alexandre.joushomme@u-bordeaux.fr (A.J.);

andre.garenne@u-bordeaux.fr (A.G.); remy330@msn.com (R.R.);
hruigrok@sebia.com (H.J.R.); yann.chappe@u-bordeaux.fr (Y.L.C.);
anne.canovi@u-bordeaux.fr (A.C.); lorenza.patrignoni@u-bordeaux.fr
(L.P.); annabelle.hurtier@ims-bordeaux.fr (A.H.);
ﬂorence.poulletier@ims-bordeaux.fr (F.P.d.G.);
isabelle.lagroye@ephe.psl.eu (I.L.); noelle.lewis@u-bordeaux.fr (N.L.)

2 Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IBGC/UMR 5095, F-33000 Bordeaux, France;
melody.dufossee@ibgc.cnrs.fr (M.D.);

muriel.priault@ibgc.cnrs.fr (M.P.) Paris Sciences et Lettres Research
University, F-75006 Paris, France

3

4 Univ. Limoges, CNRS, XLIM/UMR 7252, F-87000 Limoges, France;
philippe.leveque@unilim.fr (P.L.);

Citation: Joushomme, A.; Garenne,

delia.arnaud-cormos@unilim.fr (D.A.-C.) Institut Universitaire de France
(IUF), F-75005 Paris, France

5

A.; Dufossée, M.; Renom, R.; Ruigrok,

* Correspondence: yann.percherancier@ims-bordeaux.fr; Tel.:
+33-5-40-00-27-24

H.J.; Chappe, Y.L.; Canovi, A.;

Patrignoni, L.; Hurtier, A.; Poulletier

de Gannes, F.; et al. Label-Free Study

of the Global Cell Behavior during

Exposure to Environmental

Radiofrequency Fields in the

Presence or Absence of Pro-Apoptotic

or Pro-Autophagic Treatments. Int. J.

Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658. https://

doi.org/10.3390/ijms23020658

Academic Editor: Elena

López-Martín

Received: 8 November 2021

Accepted: 24 December 2021

Published: 8 January 2022

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Abstract: It remains controversial whether exposure to environmental
radiofrequency signals (RF) impacts cell status or response to cellular
stress such as apoptosis or autophagy. We used two label- free
techniques, cellular impedancemetry and Digital Holographic Microscopy
(DHM), to assess the overall cellular response during RF exposure alone,
or during co-exposure to RF and chemical treatments known to induce
either apoptosis or autophagy. Two human cell lines (SH-SY5Y and HCT116)
and two cultures of primary rat cortex cells (astrocytes and co-culture
of neurons and glial cells) were exposed to RF using an 1800 MHz carrier
wave modulated with various environmental signals (GSM: Global System
for Mobile Communications, 2G signal), UMTS (Universal Mobile
Telecommunications System, 3G signal), LTE (Long-Term Evolution, 4G
signal, and Wi-Fi) or un- modulated RF (continuous wave, CW). The
speciﬁc absorption rates (S.A.R.) used were 1.5 and 6 W/kg during DHM
experiments and ranged from 5 to 24 W/kg during the recording of
cellular impedance. Cells were continuously exposed for three to ﬁve
consecutive days while the temporal phenotypic signature of cells
behavior was recorded at constant temperature. Statistical analysis of
the results does not indicate that RF-EMF exposure impacted the global
behavior of healthy, apoptotic, or autophagic cells, even at S.A.R.
levels higher than the guidelines, provided that the temperature was
kept constant.

Keywords: label-free techniques; radiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁelds;
bioelectromagnetics; digital holographic microscopy; impedancemetry;
human cell lines; rat cortex primary cells; apoptosis; autophagy

1.  Introduction

In the last thirty years, thousands of in vitro studies have been
conducted to assess the potential physiological impacts of exposure to
radiofrequency (RF) and extremely low-frequency ﬁelds [1–3]. These
studies showed how extremely low-frequency ﬁelds induce nerve
stimulation and how high-level RF exposures cause tissue heating at the

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23020658

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)
International Journal of Molecular SciencesInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23,
658

2 of 21

biophysical level. As a result, recommendations and standards have been
established to protect populations from the associated health risks.
Moreover, the potential non-thermal effects of low-level RF ﬁelds (i.e.,
at levels below the international guidelines) have been extensively
studied without providing a deﬁnite answer based on physical knowledge.
Two main challenges hinder the complete description of low-level RF
effects: (i) the lack of knowledge about low-level effective ﬁeld
parameters and (ii) the complexity of the living machinery, making it
challenging to deﬁne which cellular or molecular processes are targeted
or impacted by RF exposure. In the context of health-risk assessment,
this double challenge can only be addressed by continuing the search for
the biological effects of RF exposure at levels below the guidelines
using innovative methods.

Regarding co-exposures with environmental mutagens/carcinogens or
chemical stres- sors such as pollutants, the situation is even more
complex. For example, such co-exposures might affect DNA repair
mechanisms, stimulate reactive oxygen species, or prevent free radical
scavenging. Furthermore, one should still assess whether co-exposures
between RF and known physical or chemical stresses lead to additive or
synergistic adverse effects triggering cell death by apoptosis or
autophagy [4,5].

The approaches previously used to study the cellular and molecular
effects of low- level RF exposure have produced at best either
large-scale data (such as “omics”) [6–8] or data acquired in real time
and live cells, but focusing only on one cellular or molecular mechanism
(e.g., the BRET approach that we developed recently [9–11]).
Unfortunately, large-scale data are obtained from cell extracts
following RF exposure, using, in most cases, stringent preparative
steps. Such techniques help to identify cumulative stressor-triggered
effects. Nonetheless, since cells exist in a metastable and often
reversible equilibrium state, the risk is to overlook the RF effect due
to the inability of these techniques to follow the dynamics of the
living process. On the other hand, analyzing the dynamics of one speciﬁc
cellular or molecular process in real-time under RF exposure requires
knowledge of the RF interaction mechanism with living matter.

In summary, after decades of international research, whether RF exposure
at levels below guidelines causes biological effects is still a matter
of debate. Moreover, difﬁculties were encountered in interpreting and
replicating the data of earlier studies, often acquired using ill-deﬁned
exposure conditions [2]. As a consequence, bioelectromagnetics research
has stalled while societal concerns increased.

One solution to overcome these limitations is to use an empirical
approach integrating the global cellular response during RF exposure or
co-exposure with either chemicals or stressors. In the last ﬁfteen
years, label-free techniques emerged, offering the possibility of
interrogating a broad panel of drug molecules with comprehensive
coverage in targets, pathways, networks, and cellular processes of
native cells in real-time. These techniques are based on several reading
modes, such as cellular impedance measurement (also called cell
impedancemetry), resonant waveguide grating, or digital holographic
microscopy, and they detect morphological changes in cells challenged
with chemicals [12–14]. Such techniques are powerful for revealing
responses when there is little or no knowledge about the drug or
stressor mechanism of action, and they are perfectly ﬁt for
bioelectromagnetics research. However, their use requires that
cell-culture exposure to RF does not interfere with the read-out of the
cell phenotype. To this aim, we ﬁrst developed an EMF exposure device
based on impedancemetry [15] to monitor in real time the phenotypic
response of neuronal cells under RF exposure. Using this setup, we
exposed cells to modulated- (GSM: Global System for Mobile
Communications, 2G signal), UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunications
System, 3G signal), LTE (Long-Term Evolution, 4G signal, Wi-Fi), or
continuous-wave (CW) 1800 MHz signals at up to 24 W/kg over three
consecutive days at a constant temperature. We then assessed the effect
of RF exposure on the global behavior of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells,
which are often used as in vitro models of neuronal function and
differentiation in bioelectromagnetics studies, and of both rat primary
astrocytes and rat primary co-culture of neurons and glial cells. We
also studied in cells the impact of combined exposures to RF and an
environmental pollutant. Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) was

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

3 of 21

chosen since arsenic is one of the most toxic metals derived from the
natural environment. The current major cause of human arsenic toxicity
is from contamination of drinking water from natural geological sources
[16], and possibly partly upon the medical applications of arsenic
trioxide (As2O3). Fortunately, the use of arsenical pesticides in
agriculture has decreased dramatically [17]. In addition, various
studies indicated that the actual molecular mechanism for As2O3-induced
toxicity could be related to its triggering of apoptosis in many cell
lines such as the SH-SY5Y cell line [18,19] and brain cells, including
primary neurons [20] and glioma cells [21]. Finally, in a further
effort, we also adapted a transverse electromagnetic cell (TEM cell)
[22–24] onto a digital holographic microscope platform to assess whether
CW or GSM-modulated 1800 MHz signals at up to 6 W/kg and steady
temperature impacted the well characterized autophagic response of
serum-deprived HCT116 cells [25].

2.  Results 2.1. Temporal Signature of SH-SY5Y Cells Behavior in the
    Presence or Absence of As2O3 Using Impedancemetry

Using our already described xCELL-RF system [15], we ﬁrst assessed the
temporal signature of the impedance variation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma
cells over 72 h (Figure 1 A&B, blue curve). The impedance variation is
here deﬁned by the Cell Index variable (CI, see Material and Methods).
Right after cell seeding, cells started to adhere, thereby inducing a
rapid increase of the CI value. The adhesion phase was followed by a
ﬁrst pseudo-plateau during which cells are spreading and preparing for
dividing. Finally, 24 h after seeding, cells started to grow
exponentially, as indicated by a continuous increase in the CI value.
Such temporal signature agrees with data by other groups for
proliferating cells [26].

We then assessed the impact of As2O3 on the temporal signature measured
with SH- SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. Eighteen hours after seeding,
increasing concentrations of As2O3 were added to the culture media, and
impedance was recorded during the following 54 h (Figure 1A).
Immediately after As2O3 injection, we observed a complex biphasic
response which shape depended on the concentration of As2O3. For the two
lowest concentrations of As2O3 tested (0.1 µM and 0.3 µM), the temporal
signature of the CI variation followed closely the one obtained with the
control group, with a slightly smaller CI at the end of the experiment.
When 1 µM of As2O3 was added, we measured a slight increase in the
relative CI followed by a pseudo-plateau that lasted several hours
before cells started to proliferate, and an even more pronounced
decrease in the CI at the end of the experiment. Above 1 µM of AS2O3,
the temporal signature recorded in SH-SY5Y cells behaved as a
bell-shaped curve which magnitude peaked at 10 µM. When using 3 µM of
As2O3, the bell-shaped response was followed by a long plateau lasting
approximately 28 h before the CI started to decrease. Above 3 µM As2O3,
such a plateau no longer occurred. At these higher concentrations of
As2O3, after an initial increase (primary response), the CI gradually
decreased to the background (secondary response). This decrease in CI
indicates that cells are dying due to the toxicity of As2O3, which
causes them to detach from the gold electrode array. The onset of this
decrease appeared more rapidly as the concentration of As2O3 increased.
Overall, the complex temporal proﬁle of the CI variation indicates that
As2O3 above 1 µM elicited a primary response in SH-SY5Y cells with an
immediate increase in the CI. The fate of the cell culture then relies
on the biochemical reactions elicited during this primary response with
a switch between cell survival and cell death at around 2 µM As2O3.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

4 of 21

Figure 1. Characterization of the response of SH-SY5Y cells under RF
exposure alone or under co-exposure to RF and As2O3. (A)
Characterization of the normalized CI temporal signature of SH-SY5Y
cells challenged with increasing concentrations of As2O3. The vertical
dashed line indicates the time at which cells were either
mock-challenged or challenged with the indicated concentration of As2O3.
The data represent the average of four independent experiments. For
better clarity, the measurement error is not represented. (B) Example of
the CI temporal signature recorded from SH-SY5Y cell cultures that were
either sham-exposed or exposed to unmodulated 1800 MHz (CW signal) at 24
W/kg. The vertical dashed line indicates the time at which cells were
either mock- challenged or challenged with 10µM As2O3. The data
represent the average of four independent experiments ± SEM values. (C)
Statistical analysis of the effect of CW, GSM, Wi-Fi, LTE, and UMTS-
modulated 1800 MHz signals emitted at either 5, 7.6, 11.3, or 24 W/kg on
four metrics describing SH-SY5Y cells impedance measurement in the
absence or presence of As2O3. First left column: average CI measured
during the 5 h preceding injection of As2O3 or buffer. Second column to
the left: magnitude of the CI increase in response to As2O3. Third
column to the left: time at which 80% of the cell population died
following As2O3 injection. Last column on the right: cell proliferation
rate at day 3 in the absence of As2O3. The number of replicates per
condition is indicated in Supplementary Table S1.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 21 Figure 1.
Characterization of the response of SH-SY5Y cells under RF exposure
alone or under co-exposure to RF and As2O3. (A) Characterization of the
normalized CI temporal signature of SH-SY5Y cells challenged with
increasing concentrations of As2O3. The vertical dashed line indicates
the time at which cells were either mock-challenged or challenged with
the indicated concentration of As2O3. The data represent the average of
four independent experiments. For better clarity, the measurement error
is not represented. (B) Example of the CI temporal signature recorded
from SH-SY5Y cell cultures that were either sham-exposed or exposed to
unmodulated 1800 MHz (CW sig-nal) at 24 W/kg. The vertical dashed line
indicates the time at which cells were either mock-chal-lenged or
challenged with 10µM As2O3. The data represent the average of four
independent exper-iments ± SEM values. (C) Statistical analysis of the
effect of CW, GSM, Wi-Fi, LTE, and UMTS-Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

5 of 21

2.2. Effect of RF Exposure on SH-SY5Y Cell Behavior Assessed by
Impedancemetry in the Presence or Absence of As2O3 Co-Exposure

We next assessed whether exposure to various 1800 MHz signals (CW, GSM,
Wi-Fi, UMTS, and LTE) at S.A.R. of 5, 7.6, 11.3, and 24 W/kg impacted
the temporal signature of the SH-SY5Y cells recorded in the absence or
presence of 10 µM As2O3. This concentration was chosen since it induced
an intermediate temporal signature that allows the detection of either a
positive or a negative effect of RF exposure on the As2O3 efﬁcacy to
induce cell death in SH-SY5Y cells (Figure 1A). RF exposure started
immediately after the cells were seeded in the wells of the xCELLigence
plates, and continued throughout the experiment. As exempliﬁed in Figure
1B, there was no qualitative difference between the temporal signatures
recorded from sham-exposed cells or cells exposed to a CW 1800 MHz RF
signal, whatever SH-SY5Y cells were treated with As2O3 or mock-treated.
Therefore, to quantitively characterize the potential effect of RF alone
or in co-exposure with As2O3, we deﬁned four metrics: (i) the relative
quantity of cells that successfully attached and spread onto the
interdigitated electrode array as measured by the average CI of the
plateau phase acquired during the 5 h preceding injection of As2O3 or
buffer (metric 1), (ii) the magnitude of the CI increase in response to
As2O3 (metric 2), (iii) the time moment at which 80% of the cell
population was dead following As2O3 injection (metric 3), and (iv) the
cell proliferation rate obtained by measuring the slope of the growth
phase recorded in the absence of As2O3 (metric 4). As shown in Figure
1C, we only measured minors but signiﬁcant differences between sham and
some exposed conditions when considering metric 1 (e.g., Wi-Fi and LTE
signals on SH-SY5Y cells). The only other difference measured between
sham- and exposed-conditions concerned a slight increase of SH-SY5Y cell
proliferation rate in the absence of As2O3 (metric 4) under exposure to
a Wi-Fi signal at 24 W/kg.

2.3. Effect of RF Exposure on Cortical Astrocytes and Neuron-Glia
Co-Culture Cell Behavior Assessed by Impedancemetry in the Presence or
Absence of As2O3 Co-Exposure

We next wanted to assess the potential effect of RF on the global
behavior of primary astrocytes (Figure 2) and mixed cortical neuron-glia
co-cultured cells (Figure 3). These cells are considered the ones most
at risk when a cell phone is in the head proximity. Neonatal rats’
cortex astrocytes and a neuron-glia co-culture were processed as the SH-
SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. We ﬁrst assessed whether the CI temporal
variation of these primary cells was similar to the one observed with
the SH-SY5Y cell line. Following the seeding of astrocytes in the
xCELLigence plate wells, the CI increased rapidly until reaching a
plateau approximatively 10 h after the beginning of the experiment. At
22 h postseeding, astrocytes were then challenged with increasing
concentrations of As2O3 or mock challenged, and the CI variation was
measured up to 72 h postseeding (Figure 2A). As observed for the SH-SY5Y
cells, As2O3 injection induced a rapid and immediate bell-shaped
variation of the CI index, with an initial increase (primary response)
followed by a dramatic CI drop that decreased to zero for all
concentrations tested except the lowest one (10 µM). At that
concentration, the magnitude of the primary response was already close
to maximal, and cell growth resumed compared with the mock-activated
condition. Above 10 µM, the primary response’s magnitude and length
inversely varied with the increase in As2O3. The highest and longest
primary response was obtained with 15 µM of As2O3. Above 15 µM, both
magnitude and duration of the primary response decreased while cells
died more rapidly, as indicated by an early drop of the CI when As2O3
concentration increased.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

6 of 21

Figure 2. Characterization of the response of primary astrocytes cells
under RF exposure alone or under co-exposure to RF and As2O3. (A)
Characterization of the CI temporal signature of primary rat astrocytes
cells challenged with increasing concentrations of As2O3. The vertical
dashed line indicates the time at which cells were either
mock-challenged or challenged with the indicated concentration of As2O3.
The data represent the average of three independent experiments. For
better clarity, the measurement error is not represented. (B) Example of
the normalized CI temporal signature recorded from primary astrocytes
cell cultures that were either sham-exposed or exposed to unmodulated
1800 MHz (CW signal) at 24 W/kg. The vertical dashed line indicates when
cells were either mock-challenged or challenged with 30 µM As2O3. The
data represent the average of 9 to 11 independent experiments ± SEM
values. (C) Statistical analysis of the effect of CW, GSM, and
Wi-Fi-modulated 1800 MHz signals emitted at 5, 7.6, 11.3, or 24 W/kg on
four metrics describing primary astrocyte cells impedance measurement in
presence or absence of As2O3. First left column: average CI measured
during the 5 h preceding injection of As2O3 or buffer. Second column to
the left: magnitude of the CI increase in response to As2O3. Third
column to the left: time at which 80% of the cell population died
following As2O3 injection. Last column on the right: cell proliferation
rate at day 3 in the absence of As2O3. The number of replicates per
condition is indicated in Supplementary Table S1.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 21 while cells died
more rapidly, as indicated by an early drop of the CI when As2O3
concen-tration increased. Figure 2. Characterization of the response of
primary astrocytes cells under RF exposure alone or under co-exposure to
RF and As2O3. (A) Characterization of the CI temporal signature of
primary rat astrocytes cells challenged with increasing concentrations
of As2O3. The vertical dashed line in-dicates the time at which cells
were either mock-challenged or challenged with the indicated
con-centration of As2O3. The data represent the average of three
independent experiments. For better clarity, the measurement error is
not represented. (B) Example of the normalized CI temporal sig-nature
recorded from primary astrocytes cell cultures that were either
sham-exposed or exposed to unmodulated 1800 MHz (CW signal) at 24 W/kg.
The vertical dashed line indicates when cells were either
mock-challenged or challenged with 30 µM As2O3. The data represent the
average of 9 to 11 independent experiments ± SEM values. (C) Statistical
analysis of the effect of CW, GSM, and Wi-Fi-modulated 1800 MHz signals
emitted at 5, 7.6, 11.3, or 24 W/kg on four metrics describing pri-mary
astrocyte cells impedance measurement in presence or absence of As2O3.
First left column: average CI measured during the 5 h preceding
injection of As2O3 or buffer. Second column to the Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2022, 23, 658

7 of 21

Figure 3. Characterization of the response of primary cortical cells
co-culture under RF exposure alone or co-exposure to RF and As2O3. (A)
Characterization of the CI temporal signature of primary cortical cells
co-culture challenged with increasing concentrations of As2O3. The
vertical dashed line indicates the time at which cells were either
mock-challenged or challenged with the indicated concentration of As2O3.
The data represent the average of three independent experiments. For
better clarity, the measurement error is not represented. (B) Example of
the normalized CI temporal signature recorded from primary cortical
cells co-culture that were either sham-exposed or exposed to unmodulated
1800 MHz (CW signal) at 24 W/kg. The vertical dashed line indicates when
cells were either mock-challenged or challenged with 5 µM As2O3. The
data represent the average of 5 to 6 independent experiments ± SEM
values. (C) Statistical analysis of the effect of CW or GSM- modulated
1800 MHz signals emitted at 5, 7.6, 11.3, or 24 W/kg on four metrics
describing primary cortical cells co-culture impedance measurement in
absence or presence of As2O3. First left column: average CI measured
during the 5 h preceding injection of As2O3 or buffer. Second column to
the left: magnitude of the CI increase in response to As2O3. Third
column to the left: time at which 80% of the cell population died
following As2O3 injection. Last column on the right: Cell proliferation
rate during the last day of the experiment in the absence of As2O3. The
number of replicates per condition is indicated in Supplementary Table
S1.

Assessing the temporal signature of neurons and glial cells co-culture
needed longer experiments since the CI was very low during the initial
plateau phase that followed cell seeding. At 24 h postseeding, the
cortical cell culture showed a continuous increase in the CI due to the
proliferation of glial cells [27] (Figure 3A). Culture media was thus
refreshed 90 h postseeding, and As2O3 was injected in the culture media
170 h post seeding. Injection of As2O3 again induced a complex response
with an increase in cell culture growth rate

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 21 left: magnitude of
the CI increase in response to As2O3. Third column to the left: time at
which 80% of the cell population died following As2O3 injection. Last
column on the right: cell proliferation rate at day 3 in the absence of
As2O3. The number of replicates per condition is indicated in
Supplemen-tary Table S1. Figure 3. Characterization of the response of
primary cortical cells co-culture under RF exposure alone or co-exposure
to RF and As2O3. (A) Characterization of the CI temporal signature of
primary cortical cells co-culture challenged with increasing
concentrations of As2O3. The vertical dashed line indicates the time at
which cells were either mock-challenged or challenged with the indicated
con-centration of As2O3. The data represent the average of three
independent experiments. For better clarity, the measurement error is
not represented. (B) Example of the normalized CI temporal sig-nature
recorded from primary cortical cells co-culture that were either
sham-exposed or exposed to unmodulated 1800 MHz (CW signal) at 24 W/kg.
The vertical dashed line indicates when cells were either
mock-challenged or challenged with 5 µM As2O3. The data represent the
average of 5 to 6 independent experiments ± SEM values. (C) Statistical
analysis of the effect of CW or GSM-modu-lated 1800 MHz signals emitted
at 5, 7.6, 11.3, or 24 W/kg on four metrics describing primary cortical
cells co-culture impedance measurement in absence or presence of As2O3.
First left column: average CI measured during the 5 h preceding
injection of As2O3 or buffer. Second column to the left: mag-nitude of
the CI increase in response to As2O3. Third column to the left: time at
which 80% of the cell population died following As2O3 injection. Last
column on the right: Cell proliferation rate during the last day of the
experiment in the absence of As2O3. The number of replicates per
condition is indicated in Supplementary Table S1. Assessing the temporal
signature of neurons and glial cells co-culture needed longer
experiments since the CI was very low during the initial plateau phase
that followed cell Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

8 of 21

at the lowest concentration tested (1 µM) and a bell-shaped response
above 1 µM. The magnitude of the primary response was maximal at 2.5 µM
and then decreased with the increase in As2O3 concentration. This
decrease of the primary response to As2O3 is due to a sooner onset of
the CI decrease, indicating that increasing As2O3 concentration
accelerated cell death. In sharp contrast with what was observed on
SH-SY5Y and astrocytes cells, we did not measure any difference in the
shape of the CI decrease, except for the highest concentration of As2O3.

Based on these concentration-response data, we used As2O3 concentrations
of 5 and 30 µM, to trigger an intermediate response within the cortical
cells co-culture and the astrocytes culture respectively. Of note, mock
activation induced a moderate and transient change of the cortical cells
co-culture temporal signature, indicating that physical constraints such
as shear stress can modify cortical cell growth or behavior. Having
characterized the temporal signature of the CI variation in astrocytes
and cortical cells co-cultures in the presence or absence of a
suboptimal concentration of As2O3, we assessed whether RF exposure
modiﬁed such signals. As shown in Figures 2B and 3B for both primary
cell cultures, whether or not cells were challenged with As2O3, no
qualitative differences were shown when comparing the temporal signature
of the CI variation in cells exposed to 1800 MHz CW signal at 24 W/kg
and in sham-exposed cells. This was conﬁrmed by the lack of differences
between RF and sham conditions for almost all metrics considered
(Figures 2C and 3C). We only measured a small but signiﬁcant variation
of the CI reached before As2O3 or mock injection (metric 1) when
astrocytes and cortical cell co-cultures were exposed to CW or
GSM-modulated 1800 MH signals at 24 W/kg. Under those conditions, the CI
decreased slightly in RF-exposed astrocytes and increased slightly in
RF-exposed cortical cell co-culture. This parameter was not impacted
when astrocyte cells were exposed to Wi-Fi-modulated 1800 MHz signals,
whatever S.A.R. was used. We also measured a slight decrease of the
primary response magnitude (metric 2) following As2O3 treatment of
astrocytes cells exposed to Wi-Fi signal.

2.4. Characterization of Serum Starvation-Induced Autophagy in HCT116
Colon Cancer Cells Using Digital Holographic Microscopy

In a complementary label-free approach, we combined a TEM cell,
previously adapted for microscopy [22,24], with digital holographic
microscopy (DHM) to assess whether RF exposure could impact cell
autophagy (see Material and Methods). Thanks to this setup, the
morphology of HCT116 cells, a well-known model for the study of
autophagy induced by serum-deprivation [25], was ﬁrst assessed in
absence of RF exposure (Figure 4). The evolution of various parameters
such as cells thickness, volume and contact area of cells with culture
plate were derived from the DHM images. As shown in Figure 4A, both
HCT116 cells average area and volume slowly increased over time reaching
a plateau at approximatively 28 h after the beginning of the experiment.
Refreshing the cell culture media (control condition with complete
medium) did not induce any detectable perturba- tion in the average cell
volume and area temporal evolution. Interestingly, the thickness of the
cells varied only once the culture medium was refreshed, decreasing
slightly with a wave-like pattern. Replacing the Dulbecco’s modiﬁed
Eagle’s medium (DMEM) complete culture medium (see Material and Methods
for culture conditions) with serum-free Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution
(HBSS), a treatment known to induce autophagy in HCT116 cancer colon
cells [25], elicited an immediate response which led to a signiﬁcant
change in cell morphology (Figure 4A). During the ﬁrst 6 h following
serum deprivation, the cell area increased dramatically compared to the
control condition. Then, after reaching a peak, the cell area suddenly
decreased progressively to a value lower than that measured under
control conditions. The temporal evolution of the average cell volume
followed a similar although less marked pattern. The average cell
thickness remained, however, unchanged after serum deprivation.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

9 of 21

Figure 4. Effect of serum deprivation-induced autophagy on HCT116 cells
area, thickness, and volume assessed by DHM. (A) HCT116 cells were left
in culture for 24 h before the culture medium was either refreshed or
replaced with HBSS serum-free medium at the time indicated with a
vertical dashed line. DHM measurement of HCT116 cells area (left
column), thickness (middle column), or volume (right column) was
performed throughout the experiment that lasted up to 55 h. The data
represents average of three to four independent experiments ± SEM
values. (B) Functional validation of autophagy-deﬁcient HCT116 cells:
HCT116 cells transduced with non targeting sg-RNA (NTC) or with ATG7
sg-RNA (CRISPR-ATG7) were grown in complete medium or transferred to
HBSS for 4 h (serum deprivation induced autophagy). The efﬁciency of
ATG7 gene edition was veriﬁed by western blot on the top panel (Cell
Signaling Rabbit monoclonal antibody D12B11). The absence of lipidation
of the autophagy protein LC3-I into PE-conjugated LC3-II in
HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cells conﬁrms that autophagy was functionally
impaired in these cells compared to NTC cells (bottom panel—Sigma
anti-LC3B rabbit antibody L7543). (C) HCT116 or HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cells
were left in culture for 24h before the culture medium was replaced with
HBSS serum-free medium at the time indicated with a vertical dashed
line. Cells area was measured throughout the experiment using DHM. The
data represents the average of three independent experiments ± SEM
values.

To assess whether the initial increase in the average cell area is
indicative of an autophagic response, we generated the
HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cell line that does not express the ATG7 gene (Figure
4B), which is mandatory to promote autophagy [28]. As expected, ATG7
knock-out rendered the HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cell line deﬁcient for
autophagy as demonstrated by the abrogation of LC3-I/II conversion
following serum deprivation by replacement of the DMEM culture medium by
HBSS buffer (Figure 4B). As shown in Figure 4C, in contrast to the
wild-type HCT116 cells, the initial increase of the average cell area
measured during the ﬁrst six hours following serum deprivation was
abolished in HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cells. Instead, serum deprivation
induced a slow

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 21 that measured
under control conditions. The temporal evolution of the average cell
vol-ume followed a similar although less marked pattern. The average
cell thickness re-mained, however, unchanged after serum deprivation.
Figure 4. Effect of serum deprivation-induced autophagy on HCT116 cells
area, thickness, and vol-ume assessed by DHM. (A) HCT116 cells were left
in culture for 24h before the culture medium was either refreshed or
replaced with HBSS serum-free medium at the time indicated with a
vertical dashed line. DHM measurement of HCT116 cells area (left
column), thickness (middle column), or volume (right column) was
performed throughout the experiment that lasted up to 55h. The data
represents average of three to four independent experiments ± SEM
values. (B) Functional valida-tion of autophagy-deficient HCT116 cells:
HCT116 cells transduced with non targeting sg-RNA (NTC) or with ATG7
sg-RNA (CRISPR-ATG7) were grown in complete medium or transferred to
HBSS for 4h (serum deprivation induced autophagy). The efficiency of
ATG7 gene edition was ver-ified by western blot on the top panel (Cell
Signaling Rabbit monoclonal antibody D12B11). The absence of lipidation
of the autophagy protein LC3-I into PE-conjugated LC3-II in
HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cells confirms that autophagy was functionally
impaired in these cells compared to NTC cells (bottom panel—Sigma
anti-LC3B rabbit antibody L7543). (C) HCT116 or HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cells
were left in culture for 24h before the culture medium was replaced with
HBSS serum-free medium at the time indicated with a vertical dashed
line. Cells area was measured throughout the experiment using DHM. The
data represents the average of three independent experiments ± SEM
values. To assess whether the initial increase in the average cell area
is indicative of an au-tophagic response, we generated the
HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cell line that does not ex-press the ATG7 gene
(Figure 4B), which is mandatory to promote autophagy [28]. As ex-pected,
ATG7 knock-out rendered the HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cell line deficient for
au-tophagy as demonstrated by the abrogation of LC3-I/II conversion
following serum dep-rivation by replacement of the DMEM culture medium
by HBSS buffer (Figure 4B). As Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

10 of 21

decrease of the HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 average cell area which continued
until the end of the recording, reaching a similar value to the control
cell line. This last result indicates that the autophagic process in
serum-deprived HCT116 cells is accompanied by an increase in the cell
area in contact with the cell culture plate. Cell volume also increased
during the ﬁrst six hours following serum deprivation while the
thickness of the cells remained constant. The cell area decrease
observed after this initial response likely reﬂects the cell failure to
overcome the absence of serum and the subsequent cell death. The median
value of the cell area measured during the last 3 h before serum
deprivation, the relative magnitude of the autophagic response during
the 3 h following serum deprivation, and the cell death rate in the last
20 h of the experiments represent therefore good indicators for
quantitatively evaluating the HCT116 cell signature in our experiments.

2.5. Effect of RF Exposure on the Autophagic Response of HCT116 Cells

We then assessed the impact of RF exposure on autophagy in HCT116 cells.
The cells were sham-exposed or exposed to CW or GSM-modulated 1800 MHz
signals at 1.5 and 6 W/kg, two levels that are slightly below and above
the guidelines, respectively. The average cell area was measured in
real-time under sham or RF exposure before and after serum deprivation,
which occurred 24 h after the beginning of RF exposure. Whatever the
signal considered and whatever the speciﬁc absorption rate (S.A.R.)
considered, we could measure a slight decrease of both the median cell
area measured during the last 3 h before serum deprivation (Figure 5A)
and the cell death rate during the last 20 h of the experiment (Figure
5C). Nonetheless, none of these effects reached statistical signiﬁcance.
The magni- tude of the autophagic response following serum deprivation
remained unchanged under RF exposure (Figure 5B).

Figure 5. Statistical analysis of the effect of CW (upper panels) and
GSM (lower panels)—modulated 1800 MHz signals emitted at either 1.5 or 6
W/kg on the average cell area measured during the last four hours before
serum deprivation (A), the relative magnitude of the autophagic response
during the 6 h following serum deprivation (B), and the cell death rate
in the last 20 h of the experiments (C). Three to four biological
replicates were performed for each experimental condition. NS: the
difference is not signiﬁcant between ”SHAM” and “EXPO” conditions.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 21 shown in Figure
4C, in contrast to the wild-type HCT116 cells, the initial increase of
the average cell area measured during the first six hours following
serum deprivation was abolished in HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 cells. Instead,
serum deprivation induced a slow de-crease of the HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7
average cell area which continued until the end of the recording,
reaching a similar value to the control cell line. This last result
indicates that the autophagic process in serum-deprived HCT116 cells is
accompanied by an increase in the cell area in contact with the cell
culture plate. Cell volume also increased during the first six hours
following serum deprivation while the thickness of the cells remained
con-stant. The cell area decrease observed after this initial response
likely reflects the cell fail-ure to overcome the absence of serum and
the subsequent cell death. The median value of the cell area measured
during the last 3 h before serum deprivation, the relative magni-tude of
the autophagic response during the 3 h following serum deprivation, and
the cell death rate in the last 20 h of the experiments represent
therefore good indicators for quan-titatively evaluating the HCT116 cell
signature in our experiments. 2.5. Effect of RF Exposure on the
Autophagic Response of HCT116 Cells We then assessed the impact of RF
exposure on autophagy in HCT116 cells. The cells were sham-exposed or
exposed to CW or GSM-modulated 1800 MHz signals at 1.5 and 6 W/kg, two
levels that are slightly below and above the guidelines, respectively.
The aver-age cell area was measured in real-time under sham or RF
exposure before and after se-rum deprivation, which occurred 24 h after
the beginning of RF exposure. Whatever the signal considered and
whatever the specific absorption rate (S.A.R.) considered, we could
measure a slight decrease of both the median cell area measured during
the last 3 h before serum deprivation (Figure 5A) and the cell death
rate during the last 20 h of the experi-ment (Figure 5C). Nonetheless,
none of these effects reached statistical significance. The magnitude of
the autophagic response following serum deprivation remained unchanged
under RF exposure (Figure 5B). Figure 5. Statistical analysis of the
effect of CW (upper panels) and GSM (lower panels)—modulated 1800 MHz
signals emitted at either 1.5 or 6 W/kg on the average cell area
measured during the last four hours before serum deprivation (A), the
relative magnitude of the autophagic response during the 6 h following
serum deprivation (B), and the cell death rate in the last 20 h of the
experiments (C). Three to four biological replicates were performed for
each experimental condition. NS: the difference is not significant
between ”SHAM” and “EXPO” conditions. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

11 of 21

3.  Discussion

It remains controversial whether exposure to environmental
radiofrequency signals impacts cell status or response to cellular
stress such as apoptosis or autophagy. We here took advantage of the
impedancemetry and holographic microscopy techniques to assess the
overall cellular response during RF exposure alone or during co-exposure
to RF and chemical treatments known to induce either apoptosis or
autophagy.

Regarding the cell types used in our study (e.g., SH-SY5Y human
glioblastoma cell line, HCT116 human colon cancer cells, rat primary
astrocytes and rat primary neurons—glia co-culture), many research
groups have evaluated the potential impact of RF signals on cell
proliferation or cell death, including apoptosis and autophagy.

Ten studies reported experiments in which cell proliferation and/or cell
death were studied in SH-SY5Y cells exposed to RF-EMF [29–38]. Half of
these studies exposed SH- SY5Ycells to RF-EMF in the 872–935 MHz band,
while the other studies were in the 1760– 2100 MHz band. In addition,
half of the studies focused on CW or GSM-modulated signals, while the
others used pulsed, intermittent, W-CDMA, or LTE modulated signals. The
S.A.R. levels ranged from 0.086 W/kg [38] to 5W/kg [34], and the
duration of exposure was from several minutes [35] to 3 days [32]. Eight
studies reported no effect of RF-EMF exposure on apoptosis [29–31,38],
cell proliferation [33,34], cell viability [36], or cell differentiation
[37]. Only two studies reported that RF-EMF exposure impacted SH-SY5Y
cell proliferation after a 24 h exposure to a GSM modulated 900 MHz
signal at 1 W/kg [35] or after a 72 h exposure to an LTE-modulated 1760
MHz signal at 2 W/kg [32]. Of note, two studies from the Scarﬁ group
described that SH-SY5Y cells previously exposed for 20 h to an
UMTS-modulated 1950 MHz signal at 0.3 W/kg developed an adaptive
response to subsequent treatment with menadione [39,40]. While in our
study we also exposed SH-SY5Y cells to RF for a similar duration before
challenging cells with As2O3, we did not measure any effect related to
an adaptive response in our experimental conditions. Both studies cannot
however be compared since we used a very different RF signal (in terms
of carrier wave frequency, S.A.R., and modulation) and since we
challenged cells with As2O3 instead of menadione. Whether our xCELL-RF
setup could help investigating an RF-induced adaptive response in
SH-SY5Y cells or other cell types needs to be evaluated in future
studies.

Two research articles described the effect of various RF signals on
human colon cancer HCT116 cells. First, the impact of high power and
short duration oscillatory pulses of electromagnetic ﬁelds with a signal
frequency of either 150 or 1500 MHz on various biological parameters,
including cell growth and apoptosis, was investigated by Gibot et
al. (2019) without showing any signiﬁcant effect [41]. More recently,
Ozgur et al. (2021) showed increased apoptosis and inﬂammatory response
in HCT116 cells exposed for 1 and 4 h to an intermittent (15 min on / 15
min off) GSM-EDGE modulated signals at 900, 1.800, and 2.100 MHz at 2
W/kg [42]. However, no numerical dosimetry was performed in this
research work, and the temperature of the culture medium during exposure
was not monitored, casting doubt on the occurrence of a non-thermal
effect.

Regarding the effects of RF on primary cell cultures from brain origin,
nine articles reported the effects of 900, 1800, and 1950 MHz RF signals
on neonatal cortical cells [43–47], microglial cells and astrocytes
[46,48,49], embryonic neural stem cells [50,51], and spiral ganglion
neurons [48]. Six of these studies focused on GSM-modulated signals,
while the others used either a CW signal or a TD-SDMA-modulated signal.
The S.A.R. used ranged from 0.25 W/kg [46,50,51] to 5.36 W/kg [49] and
the duration of exposure ranged from 15 min [51] to 3 days [50]. Six
studies reported no effects of RF exposure on cell proliferation, cell
viability, apoptosis, or autophagy [43,46–48,50,51]. A small but
signiﬁcant increase in autophagy could be measured when spiral ganglion
neurons were co-exposed to lipopolysaccharide and an intermittent (5 min
on/10 min off) GSM-modulated 1800 MHz signal emitted at 4 W/kg for 24 h
[48]. A decrease in neonatal cortical cells viability was measured by
Zhu et al. (2008) after exposure of the ex-vivo cell culture to a 900
MHz signal at 0.1 mW/cm2 [44]. Unfortunately, in this last article, the
exposure system was ill-deﬁned and the modulation of the signal was not
indicated, preventing any conclusion. In the study

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

12 of 21

by [51], differentiation was highly diminished in neural stem cells but
not in astrocytes, following exposure to a GSM-modulated 900 MHz signal
emitted for 2 h at a 2.287 W/kg using a GSM mobile phone simulator.
Again, the lack of proper characterization of the exposure system
precluded any conclusion regarding the reported effects. In the study by
Joubert et al. (2008), an increased apoptosis rate was measured in rat
primary cortical neuronal cultures exposed to 900 MHz CW RF ﬁelds for 24
h at 2 W/kg [45]. Interestingly, this effect was more pronounced 24 h
after exposure. The authors indicated that, despite state-of-the-art
dosimetry of their experiments and assessment of temperature bias,
thermal effects of the RF ﬁeld at the interface between the culture
medium and the support could not be ruled out. In the study by Liu et
al. (2012), a marked decrease in cell proliferation, increased cell
apoptosis, and morphological changes in the cells were detected in mouse
primary astrocytes after 48 h of exposure to 1950-MHz TD-SCDMA at 5.36
W/kg [49]. The RF-EMF were emitted from a calibrated standard dipole,
but no numerical dosimetry of the exposure was described. Moreover, no
details were given about the temperature regulation of the cell plate.
Therefore, it might be possible that local thermal effects caused the
cells to undergo apoptosis.

Overall, most of the studies herein discussed have shown no effects on
apoptosis, autophagy, or cell proliferation following in vitro exposure
of either SH-SY5Y and HCT116 cell lines or primary culture from rodent
brain. Furthermore, many of the studies showing an effect are
questionable in terms of exposure condition characterization, which
casts doubts on the reports of a pure non-thermal effect. Some research
groups have emphasized the negative association between the outcome of
cellular response in bioelectromagnetics studies and the quality of the
experimental procedures, particularly the exposure condi- tions [52].
Nonetheless, many studies mentioned above relied on endpoints measured
after various exposure durations. Consequently, such studies may have
missed a transient effect due to RF exposure.

In our study, both impedancemetry and holographic microscopy techniques
gave access to the temporal variation of different endpoints in cell
cultures under RF exposure, thus precluding to overlook any transient
effect of RF exposure. Using impedancemetry, any response that induces
changes in cell morphology (size, volume, shape, or spreading), cell
number (proliferation or death), or movement (migration or
extravasation) are investi- gated through the monitoring of a unique
index. The setup design allows simultaneous measurement of multiple
wells, including sham-exposed and RF-exposed cells at four different
S.A.R. Digital holographic microscopy gives access to a more precise
analysis of the cell phenotype since, in addition to cell proliferation,
we can measure about twenty different parameters in real-time, including
cell volume, length, and area. However, we measured only one sample per
microscope under sham or RF exposure.

Using impedancemetry, we measured the effects of ﬁve signals (CW, GSM,
Wi-Fi, UMTS, and LTE) on SH-SY5Y cells, three different signals on
astrocytes (CW, GSM, and Wi-Fi), and two signals on cortical neurons and
glial cells (CW and GSM). The exposure lasted 70 h for SH-SY5Y and
astrocytes and 110 h for co-cultured cortical neurons and glial cells.
Each time, the effect of a given signal was measured simultaneously at
four levels above the guidelines (5, 7.6, 11.3, and 24 W/kg) in addition
to the sham condition. All assays were performed in the absence or
presence of a suboptimal concentration of As2O3 to assess both the
effects of RF alone and a potential effect of co-exposure to RF with a
chemical stressor. Consequently, 110 different experimental conditions
were tested. We measured four different metrics on the acquired temporal
signatures, that describe the cell behavior at critical time points and
give insights into how RF could have impacted (i) cells adherence and
spreading, (ii) the capacity of the cells to respond to As2O3, (iii)
cell death rate following As2O3 injection, and (iv) cell proliferation
rate in the absence of As2O3. Our results indicate that, whatever the RF
signal, S.A.R., or the cell type considered, there is almost no
difference in the capacity of the cells to respond to As2O3 (metrics 2
and 3) and in cell proliferation rate (metric 4). We only measured a
~20% decrease in the amplitude of the initial CI increase occurring
following As2O3 injection (primary response)

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

13 of 21

when astrocytes were exposed to a Wi-Fi signal at 24 W/kg, and an
increase of the cell proliferation rate when SH-SY5Y cells were exposed
also to Wi-Fi signal at 24 W/kg. Slight but statistically signiﬁcant
variations were however measured for cell attachment and cell spreading
(metric 1) between sham and exposed conditions, especially at 24 W/kg, a
value signiﬁcantly higher than the guidelines. This can be due to an
increase in the metallic losses of the electrodes. Whatever the
experimental conditions considered, no transient effect of RF exposure
on the temporal signature of both resting and As2O3-challenged cells was
observed.

In a further effort to unravel potential RF effects on resting and
stressed cells, we also used DHM to study the effect of CW or
GSM-modulated 1800 MHz RF-EMF, at 1.5 and 6 W/kg, on HCT116 colon cancer
cell lines. We selected this cell line since it is a well-known model to
study autophagy in serum deprived conditions [25]. We ﬁrst assessed
whether DHM was prone to detect phenotypic changes in autophagic cells
following serum deprivation. Using DHM, we measured the average HCT116
cell volume, thickness, and area before and after serum deprivation. All
these parameters are informative to discriminate between apoptosis and
necrosis, the two different types of cell death, but nothing has been
described so far for autophagy [53]. According to Alm et al. (2013)
[53], a decrease in cell area with a slight increase in volume and
thickness occur at the onset of the apoptosis process. Following this
ﬁrst transient response, the thickness of cells increases gradually
until reaching a plateau and ﬁnally decreases, while both cells area and
volume concomitantly and continuously decrease. This indicates that
cells basis shrinks during apoptosis while the cells bodies stretch and
fragment. The temporal signature of necrosis is slightly different with
a decrease of both thickness and volume but with an increase in cells
area. This indicates that during necrosis, contrary to apoptosis, the
cells spread out and ﬂatten while dying [53]. We here complete the
observations of Alm et al. [53] by describing the temporal signature of
autophagy. Autophagy is characterized by a ﬁrst transient response where
both the average cell areas and volumes transiently and rapidly increase
following serum privation. From the molecular standpoint, autophagy
onset in response to stress is known to be very fast, as it only takes
20 min to form functional autophagosomes. Our study analyses autophagy
from the morphological standpoint, and shows that three-to-four hours
following serum deprivation, both average cell areas and volumes reach a
plateau and then continuously decrease until the end of the experiment.
During this process, the thickness of the cells remains almost
identical, indicating that the basis of the autophagic cells enlarges
before contracting. Notably, the ﬁrst transient response (an increase in
average cell volume, characterized by a broader cell basis and no change
in cell thickness) was not observed in HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7
autophagy-deﬁcient cells, thereby showing the speciﬁcity of our
read-out. After this ﬁrst period, the time signatures for HCT116 WT and
HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7 overlap, probably indicating that the autophagic
process did not compensate for the lack of nutrients, leading to cell
death. In a second step, we assessed the impact of RF ﬁelds on healthy
and autophagic cells by measuring the cell area which was the lead
parameter for assessing the autophagic re- sponse. Wild-type HCT116
cells were continuously exposed under CW or GSM-modulated 1800 MHz
signals at 1.5 and 6 W/kg for 24 h before autophagy was triggered by
serum deprivation. In addition, the temporal signature of both sham and
RF-exposed HCT116 cells was measured for a further 36 h. Quantitative
analysis of the temporal signature revealed that RF exposure, whatever
the signal or the S.A.R. considered, slightly decreased both average
cell area before serum deprivation and cell death rate in the last 20 h
of the experiments, with no change in the autophagic response. Such
difference nonetheless did not reach statistical signiﬁcance.

Overall, our time-resolved analysis under experimental conditions where
the tempera- ture was kept constant did not show any effects of RF on
the cellular response in healthy, apoptotic, or autophagic cells, even
at S.A.R. levels above the international guidelines. Fur- ther studies
complying with rigorous and standardized experimental methodology
[52,54] will help consolidate our ﬁndings.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

14 of 21

4.  Materials and Methods 4.1. Reagents

Arsenic trioxide (ATO, As2O3) was acquired from Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO, USA.

4.2. Cell Culture

Undifferentiated SH-SY5Y cell line (ATCC, Cat. No. CRL2266, Manassas,
VA, USA) cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s minimal essential medium:
Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F12) with 15% fetal bovine serum, 1%
non-Essential Amino Acids supplemented with 1% penicillin-streptomycin
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA).

HCT116 human colorectal carcinoma cells were initially obtained from
Dr. Vogelstein (Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA). Using the
lentiCRISPR system detailed in O’Prey et al. (2017) [55], HCT116 cells
deleted for ATG7, and therefore deﬁcient for autophagy (noted
HCT116-CRISPR-ATG7) were generated. Both HCT116 and HCT116- CRISPR-ATG7
cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium-high glucose
(DMEM, Cat. No. D6429; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units ml−1 penicillin, and
streptomycin.

The primary neuronal cells were obtained from the cortex of embryonic
(E18) Sprague– Dawley rats (Charles River Laboratories, L’Arbresle,
France). After 5% isoﬂurane anesthe- sia, the gestating rat was
sacriﬁced by elongation. Next, embryo cortices were dissected in
Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium (DMEM)-penicillin/streptomycin (Fisher
Scien- tiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA) and treated for 30 min with an enzymatic
solution containing 20 units ml−1 of papain and 0.005% of DNase
(Worthington Biochemical Corporation, Lake- wood, CO, USA). The
fragments were then subjected to mechanical dissociation using a 10-mL
serological pipette and centrifuged at 300× g for 5 min at room
temperature. Next, the supernatant was eliminated, and the pellet was
resuspended in a solution with DNase. This latter mixture was placed
above an albumin-inhibitor solution to create a discontinu- ous density
gradient and then centrifuged at 70× g for 6 min at room temperature. In
this last step, the dissociated cells (in the pellet) were separated
from membrane fragments of dead cells in the supernatant. Finally, the
pellet containing cortical cells was suspended in the culture medium
composed of neurobasal medium supplemented with 2% B-27, 1% GlutaMAX,
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Fisher Scientiﬁc). Each well was plated
with a suspension of 200,000 cells in 100 µL. Laminin (L2020,
Sigma–Aldrich, St. Quentin-Fallavier, France) was used at the
concentration of 50 µg/mL to coat xCELLigence wells 3 h before seeding
to promote attachment of primary neurons cells.

Rat primary cortical astrocytes (N7745100, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) were
maintained in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium high glucose
(Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin (Fisher Scientiﬁc). Cells were seeded at a
density of 20,000 cells per well in an xCELLigence E-plate 16 (Agilent,
Santa Clara, CA, USA). No coating was used to promote the attachment of
primary astrocytes.

When indicated, apoptosis was induced in SH-SY5Y cells, astrocytes, and
co-culture of neurons and glial cells by adding As2O3 directly in the
culture media at the indicated concentration. Autophagy was induced in
HCT116 cells by serum deprivation following replacement of the DMEM
nutrient rich culture medium by Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS,
Cat. No. 14025092; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) containing 1 g/L Glucose and
buffered with NaHCO3 (2.2 g/L) [25].

4.3. Cellular Impedance Assay

Cellular impedance measurement of global cellular activity was monitored
in a humid- iﬁed incubator at 5% CO2 and 37 ◦C using the xCELLigence
apparatus (Agilent). Using this setup, changes induced in the local
ionic environment at the electrode/solution interface yield an increase
in electrode impedance. Changes in cell morphology and/or adhesion that
modulate the physical contact between cells and electrodes are reﬂected
in impedance

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

15 of 21

changes. The change in impedance is reported as a dimensionless
parameter called Cell Index (CI) according to Equation (1):

CI =

impedance at time point n – impedance without cells nominal impedance

(1) 

As no commercial system allowed cellular impedance measurement under RF
expo- sure, we adapted the xCELLigence apparatus to our requirement.
Using a parallel electrical circuitry bridging the RF signal generator
to the gold connectors of the xCELLigence plates, we simultaneously
performed impedance measurement while delivering the RF signals (CW,
GSM, Wi-Fi, UMTS, and LTE) to the attached cells. The numerical and
experimental dosimetry and the setup of the exposure system formed by
the xCELLigence and RF devices (xCELL-RF) were presented in detail in
Garcia-Fernandez et al. (2016) [15]. We used the internal design of our
xCELL-RF setup to deliver 1800 MHz RF signals at various input powers
resulting in S.A.R.s of 5, 7.6, 11.3, and 24 W/kg.

A vector generator (SMBV100A, Rohde & Schwarz, Munich, Germany)
delivering 1800 MHz RF signals was connected to a bidirectional coupler
(ZGBDC30-372HP+, Mini- circuits, Brooklyn, NY, USA). The coupler was
followed by a 2-way power splitter (PE2088, Pasternack, Irvine, CA,
USA), and each way was connected to a 3-way power splitter (PE2090,
Pasternack) which delivered the required powers to the xCELLigence
Eplate (Figure 6A). The setup’s incident and reﬂected powers were
monitored using two power sensors (N1921A, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA,
USA) and a power meter (Agilent) connected to the bidirectional coupler.
High values of RF electric ﬁeld and S.A.R. are mainly localized in the
proximity of the electrodes and within the cells layer, as attested by
Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD)-based numerical dosimetry (Figure
6B).

Figure 6. xCELL-RF system for simultaneous RF exposure and impedance
measurements of cells. (A) xCELL-RF device with the RF connections to
the dock. (B) Normalized S.A.R. distribution in the delivery system at
1800 MHz. For better readability, only half of the S.A.R. distribution
and a vertical cut plane (top inset) are represented on the ﬁgure. (C)
Experimental measurement of temperature elevation at the cell level
using a S.A.R. of 240 W/kg, inset: example of picture acquired during
temperature measurement.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 21 4.3. Cellular
Impedance Assay Cellular impedance measurement of global cellular
activity was monitored in a hu-midified incubator at 5% CO2 and 37 °C
using the xCELLigence apparatus (Agilent). Using this setup, changes
induced in the local ionic environment at the electrode/solution
inter-face yield an increase in electrode impedance. Changes in cell
morphology and/or adhe-sion that modulate the physical contact between
cells and electrodes are reflected in im-pedance changes. The change in
impedance is reported as a dimensionless parameter called Cell Index
(CI) according to Equation (1): 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶=impedance at time point n –
impedance without cellsnominal impedance (1) As no commercial system
allowed cellular impedance measurement under RF expo-sure, we adapted
the xCELLigence apparatus to our requirement. Using a parallel
electri-cal circuitry bridging the RF signal generator to the gold
connectors of the xCELLigence plates, we simultaneously performed
impedance measurement while delivering the RF signals (CW, GSM, Wi-Fi,
UMTS, and LTE) to the attached cells. The numerical and ex-perimental
dosimetry and the setup of the exposure system formed by the xCELLigence
and RF devices (xCELL-RF) were presented in detail in Garcia-Fernandez
et al. (2016) [15]. We used the internal design of our xCELL-RF setup to
deliver 1800 MHz RF signals at various input powers resulting in S.A.R.s
of 5, 7.6, 11.3, and 24 W/kg. A vector generator (SMBV100A, Rohde &
Schwarz, Munich, Germany) delivering 1800 MHz RF signals was connected
to a bidirectional coupler (ZGBDC30-372HP+, Mini-circuits, Brooklyn, NY,
USA). The coupler was followed by a 2-way power splitter (PE2088,
Pasternack, Irvine, CA, USA), and each way was connected to a 3-way
power splitter (PE2090, Pasternack) which delivered the required powers
to the xCELLigence Eplate (Figure 6A). The setup’s incident and
reflected powers were monitored using two power sensors (N1921A,
Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and a power meter (Agilent) con-nected to
the bidirectional coupler. High values of RF electric field and S.A.R.
are mainly localized in the proximity of the electrodes and within the
cells layer, as attested by Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD)-based
numerical dosimetry (Figure 6B). Figure 6. xCELL-RF system for
simultaneous RF exposure and impedance measurements of cells. (A)
xCELL-RF device with the RF connections to the dock. (B) Normalized
S.A.R. distribution in the delivery system at 1800 MHz. For better
readability, only half of the S.A.R. distribution and a vertical Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

16 of 21

The temperature variation was measured using an optical probe (Luxtron,
Santa Clara, CA, USA). The temperature at the cell level was increased
by 0.5 ◦C when the culture dish was exposed at the high S.A.R. value of
240 W/kg (Figure 1C). This slight temperature increase associated with a
high S.A.R. value is due to the rapid heating diffusion by the whole
culture media that buffered the temperature increase. The temperature at
the cell level during exposure to RF at 24 W/kg monitored in a separate
experiment did not evidenced any detectable variation.

The E16 xCELLigence plates were prepared by adding cells in a complete
medium (100 µL) as indicated in the cell culture section. When
indicated, 100 µL of PBS buffer or a 2X ATO solution was added to the
culture medium.

4.4. Impedancemetry Data Analysis

Four metrics were deﬁned to characterize the possible effects of applied
physical and

chemical stimuli on the evolution of cell indexes.

Metric 1 (post-seeding plateau) is the median value of cell index in the
5 h preceding the moment of As2O3 injection. This metric highlights a
possible effect of the exposures on the cell index before the injection
of As2O3.

The three following metrics were calculated on normalized data, taking
the time of the As2O3 injection as a reference point (with a relative
value of 1). The metric 2 (peak) is the maximal CI variation following
As2O3 injection. Metric 3 (T80) was calculated only for experiments with
As2O3 injection and represents the time at which CI decreased by 80%
following As2O3 injection. Finally, metric 4 (slope) is calculated only
on experiments without As2O3 injection (chemical sham) and represents
the slope of the cell index increase during the last 10 h of the
experiments.

4.5. Exposure to RF and Holographic Image Acquisition

Digital holographic microscopy images were obtained using a HoloMonitor®
M4,

(Phase Holographic Imaging AB (PHIAB), Lund, Sweden).

The RF exposure system was a tri-plate open transverse electromagnetic
(TEM) cell allowing RF signals propagation [56]. Both TEM cell ground
plates had apertures to allow for light propagation through the cell
culture. Numerical modeling and simulations of aperture’s effect on cell
exposure were performed as described previously [22,24]. A vector
generator (SMBV100A, Rohde & Schwarz, Munich, Germany) connected to a
10-W ampliﬁer (RF14002600-10, RFPA, Artigues-Près-Bordeaux, France) with
around 40-dB gain was used to deliver 1800 MHz RF signals (CW and GSM)
to the exposure system.

The effect of CW and GSM-modulated signals, using an 1800 MHz carrier
wave, at S.A.R. of 1.5 and 6 W/kg was studied. Experimental dosimetry
was carried out using temperature assessment measured with an optical
probe (Luxtron). Numerical simulations with an in-house FDTD allowed the
extraction of S.A.R. distribution at the cell layer level within the
Petri dish exposed in the TEM cell (Figure 7A). The cell culture medium
temperature increased by 0.5 ± 0.1 ◦C at 1.5 W/kg and 2 ± 0.1 ◦C at 6
W/kg during the ﬁrst hour of exposure. The cell culture incubator
temperature was decreased accordingly to maintain the cell culture
medium temperature at 37 ◦C during RF exposure, as veriﬁed in a separate
experiment using an optical probe (Luxtron). Cells were temperature
equilibrated for several hours before the experiment started.

DHM images were acquired over a small area in the Petri dish center
where the S.A.R.

is homogenous (Figure 7B).

Twenty-four hours before exposure, cells were seeded at a density of
300,000 cells in a 35 mm petri dish and left in culture in a humidiﬁed
incubator at 5% CO2 and 37 ◦C. On the day of the experiment, the Petri
dishes’ lid was replaced by a HoloLidTM (PHIAB). Next, cell culture
dishes were placed in an exposure system within the HoloMonitor® M4
platforms (PHIAB) (Figure 7C). Two identical setups were used for sham
and RF-exposure conditions, but no RF was delivered to the sham
condition’s cell culture.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

17 of 21

A time-lapse movie was created using the software H-studioTM (PHIAB) for
both RF- and sham-exposure, with one capture taken every 5 min for up to
72 h in total in a humidiﬁed incubator at 5% CO2 and 37 ◦C (Figure 7D).
The effect of CW and GSM- modulated signals (using an 1800 MHz carrier
wave) at 1.5 and 6 W/kg was studied. Twenty-four hours after the start
of the exposure phase, the culture medium was replaced with 4 mL HBSS
medium without fetal bovine serum (serum deprivation) to trigger au-
tophagy [57]. Average cell area, cell volume, and cell thickness were
computed using the software H-studioTM.

Figure 7. Experimental device for exposing cells to RF while acquiring
digital holographic microscopic images. (A) Normalized S.A.R.
distribution at the cell level in the delivery system at 1800 MHz. (B)
Cross-section of the TEM cell in which a cell culture dish has been
placed. The picture indicates the propagation of the RF electric ﬁeld
and the LASER path only at the center of the cell culture plate. (C)
Photography of the TEM cell placed on the HoloMonitor M4 platform. A
hole has been drifted in both ground planes and septum of the TEM cell
to allow light to go through the cell culture. (D) Example of a digital
holographic microscopy image of a SH-SY5Y cell culture. The color scale
provides information on the height of the cells.

4.6. DHM Data Analysis

Three metrics were used to analyze the DHM data. Metric 1 describes the
median value of the signal in a 3 h interval before serum deprivation.
Metric 2 is the median value of the signal during the 3 h after the
media change. Metric 3 is the slope calculated by linear regression in a
time interval corresponding to 40 to 60 h after the beginning of the RF
exposure.

Metric 1 is calculated on the raw signal values. Metrics 2 and 3 are
calculated on the

normalized data, following normalization of the average cell area to 1
at time t = 24 h.

4.7. Statistics

Two samples comparisons were made using Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
Multiple com- parisons were made using Kruskal-Wallis tests and posthoc
Conover tests. The signiﬁcance results are all given at the alpha = 5%
risk. The tools used for these analyses were the R

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 21 Figure 7.
Experimental device for exposing cells to RF while acquiring digital
holographic micro-scopic images. (A) Normalized S.A.R. distribution at
the cell level in the delivery system at 1800 MHz. (B) Cross-section of
the TEM cell in which a cell culture dish has been placed. The picture
indicates the propagation of the RF electric field and the LASER path
only at the center of the cell culture plate. (C) Photography of the TEM
cell placed on the HoloMonitor M4 platform. A hole has been drifted in
both ground planes and septum of the TEM cell to allow light to go
through the cell culture. (D) Example of a digital holographic
microscopy image of a SH-SY5Y cell culture. The color scale provides
information on the height of the cells. DHM images were acquired over a
small area in the Petri dish center where the S.A.R. is homogenous
(Figure 7B). Twenty-four hours before exposure, cells were seeded at a
density of 300,000 cells in a 35 mm petri dish and left in culture in a
humidified incubator at 5% CO2 and 37 °C. On the day of the experiment,
the Petri dishes’ lid was replaced by a HoloLidTM (PHIAB). Next, cell
culture dishes were placed in an exposure system within the HoloMonitor®
M4 platforms (PHIAB) (Figure 7C). Two identical setups were used for
sham and RF-expo-sure conditions, but no RF was delivered to the sham
condition’s cell culture. A time-lapse movie was created using the
software H-studioTM (PHIAB) for both RF- and sham-exposure, with one
capture taken every 5 min for up to 72 h in total in a humid-ified
incubator at 5% CO2 and 37 °C (Figure 7D). The effect of CW and
GSM-modulated signals (using an 1800 MHz carrier wave) at 1.5 and 6 W/kg
was studied. Twenty-four hours after the start of the exposure phase,
the culture medium was replaced with 4 mL HBSS medium without fetal
bovine serum (serum deprivation) to trigger autophagy [57]. Average cell
area, cell volume, and cell thickness were computed using the software
H-studioTM. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

18 of 21

language [58] and the following packages: tidyverse [59], FreqProf [60],
stringi [61], and PMCMRplus [62].

Statistically signiﬁcant differences between pairwise comparisons
resulting from post hoc tests are labeled with letters (a, b, c…). This
compact letter representation (CLD) is a method for correctly
representing signiﬁcance statements resulting from pairwise comparisons:
for example, the graph with “ab” is not signiﬁcantly different from a
graph labeled with “a” or “b” but is statistically different from a
graph labeled with “c” [63].

Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at
https://www.mdpi.com/article/10 .3390/ijms23020658/s1.

Author Contributions: Participated in research design: M.P., P.L., I.L.,
D.A.-C. and Y.P.; conducted experiments: A.J., Y.L.C., F.P.d.G., A.H.,
R.R., H.J.R., A.C., L.P. and M.D. Performed data analysis: A.G., A.J.,
R.R., H.J.R. and Y.P. Wrote or contributed to the writing of the
manuscript: A.J., A.G., I.L., P.L., N.L., D.A.-C., M.P. and Y.P. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: The research leading to these results received funding from the
European Community’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007–2013) under
grant agreement no. 603794 (the GERONIMO project), the French Agency for
Food, Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety (ANSES) under
grant agreement EST-2015/2 RF/19 (the MOTUS project) and 2017/2 RF/012
(the ADAPT project)), and from the New Aquitaine regional council under
grant agreement 2017-1R50217-00013458 (the EFISIA project).

Institutional Review Board Statement: All procedures were carried out in
compliance with the European Community Council Directive for the Care
and Use of laboratory animals (2010/63/EU) and protocols were approved
by the Ethics Committee for Animal Care and Experimentation CEEA 50 of
Bordeaux.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement: Data are available upon request by writing
to the corresponding author.

Acknowledgments: We thank Bernard Veyret for his wise advice and
proofreading of the manuscript.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of
interest.

References

1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  

SSM’s Scientiﬁc Council on Electromagnetic Fields. Recent Research on
EMF and Health Risk-Fourteenth Report from SSM’s Scientiﬁc Council on
Electromagnetic Fields, 2019; Swedish Radiation Safety Authority:
Stockholm, Sweden, 2020. ICNIRP. Guidelines for limiting exposure to
electromagnetic ﬁelds (100 KHz to 300 GHz). Health Phys. 2020, 118,
483–524. [CrossRef] SCENIHR. Opinion on potential health effects of
exposure to electromagnetic ﬁelds. Bioelectromagnetics 2015, 36,
480–484. [CrossRef] Kostoff, R.N. The role of toxic stimuli combinations
in determining safe exposure limits. Toxicol. Rep. 2018, 5, 1169–1172.
[CrossRef] Schuermann, D.; Mevissen, M. Manmade Electromagnetic ﬁelds
and oxidative stress—Biological effects and consequences for health.
IJMS 2021, 22, 3772. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

7.  

8.  Whitehead, T.D.; Moros, E.G.; Brownstein, B.H.; Roti Roti, J.L. The
    Number of genes changing expression after chronic exposure to code
    division multiple access or frequency DMA radiofrequency radiation
    does not exceed the false-positive rate. Proteomics 2006, 6,
    4739–4744. [CrossRef] Chauhan, V.; Qutob, S.S.; Lui, S.;
    Mariampillai, A.; Bellier, P.V.; Yauk, C.L.; Douglas, G.R.;
    Williams, A.; McNamee, J.P. Analysis of gene expression in two
    human-derived cell lines exposedin vitro to a 1.9 GHz
    Pulse-modulated radiofrequency ﬁeld. Proteomics 2007, 7, 3896–3905.
    [CrossRef] Zeng, Q.; Chen, G.; Weng, Y.; Wang, L.; Chiang, H.; Lu,
    D.; Xu, Z. Effects of global system for mobile communications 1800
    MHz radiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁelds on gene and protein
    expression in MCF-7 Cells. Proteomics 2006, 6, 4732–4738. [CrossRef]
    Poque, E.; Arnaud-Cormos, D.; Patrignoni, L.; Ruigrok, H.J.;
    Poulletier De Gannes, F.; Hurtier, A.; Renom, R.; Garenne, A.;
    Lagroye, I.; Leveque, P.; et al. Effects of radiofrequency ﬁelds on
    RAS and ERK kinases activity in live cells using the bioluminescence
    resonance energy transfer technique. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2020, 96,
    836–843. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

9.  

10. 

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

19 of 21

10. Poque, E.; Ruigrok, H.J.; Arnaud-Cormos, D.; Habauzit, D.; Chappe,
    Y.; Martin, C.; De Gannes, F.P.; Hurtier, A.; Garenne, A.; Lagroye,
    I.; et al. Effects of radiofrequency ﬁeld exposure on
    proteotoxic-induced and heat-induced HSF1 response in live cells
    using the bioluminescence resonance energy transfer technique. Cell
    Stress Chaperones 2021, 26, 241–251. [CrossRef]

11. Ruigrok, H.J.; Arnaud-Cormos, D.; Hurtier, A.; Poque, E.; de Gannes,
    F.P.; Rufﬁé, G.; Bonnaudin, F.; Lagroye, I.; Sojic, N.; Arbault, S.;
    et al. Activation of the TRPV1 thermoreceptor induced by modulated
    or unmodulated 1800 MHz radiofrequency ﬁeld exposure. Radiat. Res.
    2018, 189, 95–103. [CrossRef]

12. Croft, L.V.; Mulders, J.A.; Richard, D.J.; O’Byrne, K. Digital
    holographic imaging as a method for quantitative, live cell imaging
    of drug response to novel targeted cancer therapies. In
    Theranostics; Batra, J., Srinivasan, S., Eds.; Methods in Molecular
    Biology; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2019; Volume 2054,
    pp. 171–183. ISBN 978-1-4939-9768-8.

13. Kliment, K.; Szekacs, I.; Peter, B.; Erdei, A.; Kurucz, I.;
    Horvath, R. Label-free real-time monitoring of the BCR-Triggered
    activation of primary human b cells modulated by the simultaneous
    engagement of inhibitory receptors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2021,
    191, 113469. [CrossRef]

14. Wegener, J. Label-Free Monitoring of Cells In Vitro; Bioanalytical
    Reviews; Wegener, J., Ed.; Springer International Publishing: Cham,

Switzerland, 2019; Volume 2, ISBN 978-3-030-32432-2.

15. Garcia-Fernandez, M.A.; Percherancier, Y.; Lagroye, I.; OConnor,
    R.P.; Veyret, B.; Arnaud-Cormos, D.; Leveque, P. Dosimetric
    Characteristics of an EMF delivery system based on a real-time
    impedance measurement device. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2016, 63,
    2317–2325. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16. Tsai, C.-L.; Tsai, C.-W.; Chang, W.-S.; Lin, J.-C.; Hsia, T.-C.;
    Bau, D.-T. Protective effects of baicalin on arsenic
    trioxide-induced oxidative damage and apoptosis in human umbilical
    vein endothelial cells. In Vivo 2021, 35, 155–162. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]

17. Bencko, V.; Yan Li Foong, F. The history of arsenical pesticides and
    health risks related to the use of agent blue. Ann. Agric.

Environ. Med. 2017, 24, 312–316. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

18. Akao, Y.; Nakagawa, Y.; Akiyama, K. Arsenic trioxide induces
    apoptosis in neuroblastoma cell lines through the activation of

caspase 3 in vitro. FEBS Lett. 1999, 455, 59–62. [CrossRef]

19. Karlsson, J.; Øra, I.; Pörn-Ares, I.; Påhlman, S. Arsenic
    trioxide-induced death of neuroblastoma cells involves activation of
    bax

and does not require P53. Clin. Cancer Res. 2004, 10, 3179–3188.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

20. Namgung, U.; Xia, Z. Arsenite-induced apoptosis in cortical neurons
    is mediated by c-jun n-terminal protein kinase 3 and p38

21. 

22. 

mitogen-activated protein kinase. J. Neurosci. 2000, 20, 6442–6451.
[CrossRef] [PubMed] Sun, Y.; Wang, C.; Wang, L.; Dai, Z.; Yang, K.
Arsenic trioxide induces apoptosis and the formation of reactive oxygen
species in rat glioma cells. Cell Mol. Biol. Lett. 2018, 23, 13.
[CrossRef] Soueid, M.; Dobbelaar, M.C.F.; Bentouati, S.; Bardet, S.M.;
O’Connor, R.P.; Bessières, D.; Paillol, J.; Leveque, P.; Arnaud-Cormos,
D. Delivery devices for exposure of biological cells to nanosecond
pulsed electric ﬁelds. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 2018, 56, 85–97.
[CrossRef]

23. Kohler, S.; Ticaud, N.; Iordache, M.-M.; Moisescu, M.G.; Savopol,
    T.; Leveque, P.; Arnaud-Cormos, D. Setup for simultaneous microwave
    heating and real-time spectroﬂuorometric measurements in biological
    systems. Prog. Electromagn. Res. 2014, 145, 229–240. [CrossRef]

24. Nefzi, A.; Carr, L.; Dalmay, C.; Pothier, A.; Leveque, P.;
    Arnaud-Cormos, D. Microdosimetry Using rhodamine B within macro- and
    microsystems for radiofrequency signals exposures of biological
    samples. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 2020, 68, 1142–1150.
    [CrossRef]

25. Priault, M.; Hue, E.; Marhuenda, F.; Pilet, P.; Oliver, L.;
    Vallette, F.M. Differential dependence on beclin 1 for the
    regulation of

pro-survival autophagy by Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL in HCT116 colorectal cancer
cells. PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e8755. [CrossRef]

26. Kho, D.; MacDonald, C.; Johnson, R.; Unsworth, C.; O’Carroll, S.;
    Mez, E.; Angel, C.; Graham, E. Application of XCELLigence RTCA
    biosensor technology for revealing the proﬁle and window of drug
    responsiveness in real time. Biosensors 2015, 5, 199–222. [CrossRef]

27. Diemert, S.; Dolga, A.M.; Tobaben, S.; Grohm, J.; Pfeifer, S.;
    Oexler, E.; Culmsee, C. Impedance measurement for real time

detection of neuronal cell death. J. Neurosci. Methods 2012, 203, 69–77.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

28. Komatsu, M.; Waguri, S.; Ueno, T.; Iwata, J.; Murata, S.; Tanida,
    I.; Ezaki, J.; Mizushima, N.; Ohsumi, Y.; Uchiyama, Y.; et al.
    Impairment of starvation-induced and constitutive autophagy in
    Atg7-Deﬁcient mice. J. Cell Biol. 2005, 169, 425–434. [CrossRef]
    Joubert, V.; Leveque, P.; Rametti, A.; Collin, A.; Bourthoumieu, S.;
    Yardin, C. Microwave Exposure of neuronal cells in vitro: Study of
    apoptosis. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2006, 82, 267–275. [CrossRef]

29. 

30. Kayhan, H.; Esmekaya, M.A.; Saglam, A.S.Y.; Tuysuz, M.Z.; Canseven,
    A.G.; Yagci, A.M.; Seyhan, N. Does MW Radiation affect gene
    expression, apoptotic level, and cell cycle progression of human
    SH-SY5Y Neuroblastoma cells? Cell Biochem. Biophys. 2016, 74,
    99–107. [CrossRef]

31. Zielinski, J.; Ducray, A.D.; Moeller, A.M.; Murbach, M.; Kuster, N.;
    Mevissen, M. Effects of pulse-modulated radiofrequency magnetic ﬁeld
    (rf-emf) exposure on apoptosis, autophagy, oxidative stress and
    electron chain transport function in human neuroblastoma and murine
    microglial cells. Toxicol. Vitro 2020, 68, 104963. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]

32. Choi, J.; Min, K.; Jeon, S.; Kim, N.; Pack, J.-K.; Song, K.
    Continuous exposure to 1.7 GHz LTE electromagnetic ﬁelds increases
    intracellular reactive oxygen species to decrease human cell
    proliferation and induce senescence. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 9238.
    [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

20 of 21

33. 

Su, L.; Wei, X.; Xu, Z.; Chen, G. RF-EMF Exposure at 1800 MHz did not
elicit dna damage or abnormal cellular behaviors in different neurogenic
cells: RF-EMF and DNA damage in neurogenic cells. Bioelectromagnetics
2017, 38, 175–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

34. Hoyto, A.; Luukkonen, J.; Juutilainen, J.; Naarala, J.
    Proliferation, oxidative stress and cell death in cells exposed to
    872 MHz

radiofrequency radiation and oxidants. Radiat. Res. 2008, 170, 235–243.
[CrossRef]

35. Buttiglione, M.; Roca, L.; Montemurno, E.; Vitiello, F.; Capozzi,
    V.; Cibelli, G. Radiofrequency Radiation (900 MHz) Induces Egr-1
    gene expression and affects cell-cycle control in human
    neuroblastoma cells. J. Cell Physiol. 2007, 213, 759–767. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]

36. Marjanovic Cermak, A.M.; Pavicic, I.; Trosic, I. Oxidative stress
    response in SH-SY5Y cells exposed to short-term 1800 MHz
    radiofrequency radiation. J. Environ. Sci. Health A Tox. Hazard
    Subst. Environ. Eng. 2018, 53, 132–138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

37. von Niederhäusern, N.; Ducray, A.; Zielinski, J.; Murbach, M.;
    Mevissen, M. Effects of radiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁeld exposure
    on neuronal differentiation and mitochondrial function in SH-SY5Y
    cells. Toxicol. Vitr. 2019, 61, 104609. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

38. Calabro, E.; Condello, S.; Curro, M.; Ferlazzo, N.; Caccamo, D.;
    Magazu, S.; Ientile, R. Modulation of heat shock protein response

39. 

in SH-SY5Y by mobile phone microwaves. World J. Biol. Chem. 2012, 3,
34–40. [CrossRef] Falone, S.; Sannino, A.; Romeo, S.; Zeni, O.; Santini,
S.; Rispoli, R.; Amicarelli, F.; Scarfì, M.R. Protective effect of 1950
MHz electromagnetic ﬁeld in human neuroblastoma cells challenged with
menadione. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 13234. [CrossRef]

40. Zeni, O.; Romeo, S.; Sannino, A.; Palumbo, R.; Scarfì, M.R. Evidence
    of bystander effect induced by radiofrequency radiation in a

human neuroblastoma cell line. Environ. Res. 2021, 196, 110935.
[CrossRef]

41. Gibot, L.; Kolosnjaj-Tabi, J.; Bellard, E.; Chretiennot, T.; Saurin,
    Q.; Catrain, A.; Golzio, M.; Vézinet, R.; Rols, M.-P. Evaluations of
    acute and sub-acute biological effects of narrowband and
    moderate-band high power electromagnetic waves on cellular
    spheroids. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 15324. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

42. Ozgur, E.; Kayhan, H.; Kismali, G.; Senturk, F.; Sensoz, M.; Ozturk,
    G.G.; Sel, T. Effects of radiofrequency radiation on colorectal

cancer cell proliferation and inﬂammation. Turkish J. Biochem. 2021, 46,
0148. [CrossRef]

43. Terro, F.; Magnaudeix, A.; Crochetet, M.; Martin, L.; Bourthoumieu,
    S.; Wilson, C.-M.; Yardin, C.; Leveque, P. GSM-900MHz at low dose
    temperature-dependently downregulates α-synuclein in cultured
    cerebral cells independently of chaperone-mediated- autophagy.
    Toxicology 2012, 292, 136–144. [CrossRef]

44. Zhu, Y.; Gao, F.; Yang, X.; Shen, H.; Liu, W.; Chen, H.; Jiang, X.
    The effect of microwave emission from mobile phones on neuron

45. 

46. 

47. 

survival in rat central nervous system. Prog. Electromagn. Res. 2008,
82, 287–298. [CrossRef] Joubert, V.; Bourthoumieu, S.; Leveque, P.;
Yardin, C. Apoptosis Is induced by radiofrequency ﬁelds through the
caspase- independent mitochondrial pathway in cortical neurons. Radiat.
Res. 2008, 169, 38–45. [CrossRef] Joubert, V.; Leveque, P.; Cueille, M.;
Bourthoumieu, S.; Yardin, C. No apoptosis is induced in rat cortical
neurons exposed to gsm phone ﬁelds. Bioelectromagnetics 2007, 28,
115–121. [CrossRef] Su, L.; Yimaer, A.; Xu, Z.; Chen, G. Effects of 1800
MHz RF-EMF Exposure on DNA damage and cellular functions in primary
cultured neurogenic cells. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2018, 94, 295–305.
[CrossRef]

48. Zuo, W.-Q.; Hu, Y.-J.; Yang, Y.; Zhao, X.-Y.; Zhang, Y.-Y.; Kong,
    W.; Kong, W.-J. Sensitivity of spiral ganglion neurons to damage
    caused by mobile phone electromagnetic radiation will increase in
    lipopolysaccharide-induced inﬂammation in vitro model. J.
    Neuroinﬂammation 2015, 12, 105. [CrossRef]

49. Liu, Y.; Tai, J.; Li, G.; Zhang, Z.; Xue, J.; Liu, H.; Zhu, H.;
    Cheng, J.; Liu, Y.; Li, A.; et al. Exposure to 1950-MHz TD-SCDMA
    electromagnetic ﬁelds affects the apoptosis of astrocytes via
    caspase-3-dependent pathway. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e42332. [CrossRef]

50. Chen, C.; Ma, Q.; Liu, C.; Deng, P.; Zhu, G.; Zhang, L.; He, M.; Lu,
    Y.; Duan, W.; Pei, L.; et al. Exposure to 1800 MHz radiofrequency

radiation impairs neurite outgrowth of embryonic neural stem cells. Sci.
Rep. 2014, 4, 5103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

51. Eghlidospour, M.; Ghanbari, A.; Mortazavi, S.M.J.; Azari, H. Effects
    of radiofrequency exposure emitted from a GSM mobile

52. 

phone on proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis of neural stem
Cells. Anat. Cell Biol. 2017, 50, 115. [CrossRef] Simkó, M.; Remondini,
D.; Zeni, O.; Scarﬁ, M. Quality matters: Systematic analysis of
endpoints related to “cellular life” in vitro data of radiofrequency
electromagnetic ﬁeld exposure. IJERPH 2016, 13, 701. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

53. Alm, K.; El-Schich, Z.; Falck, M.; Gjrloff Wingren, A.; Janicke, B.;
    Oredsso, S. Cells and Holograms—Holograms and Digital Holographic
    Microscopy as a Tool to Study the Morphology of Living Cells. In
    Holography—Basic Principles and Contemporary Applications;
    Mihaylova, E., Ed.; InTech: London, UK, 2013; ISBN
    978-953-51-1117-7.

54. Romeo, S.; Zeni, O.; Sannino, A.; Lagorio, S.; Biffoni, M.; Scarfì,
    M.R. Genotoxicity of radiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁelds:

Protocol for a systematic review of in vitro studies. Environ. Internat.
2021, 148, 106386. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

55. O’Prey, J.; Sakamaki, J.; Baudot, A.D.; New, M.; Van Acker, T.;
    Tooze, S.A.; Long, J.S.; Ryan, K.M. Application of CRISPR/Cas9 to
    Autophagy Research. In Methods in Enzymology; Elsevier: Amsterdam,
    The Netherlands, 2017; Volume 588, pp. 79–108, ISBN
    978-0-12-809674-1.

56. El Khoueiry, C.; Moretti, D.; Renom, R.; Camera, F.; Orlacchio, R.;
    Garenne, A.; Poulletier de Gannes, F.; Poque-Haro, E.; Lagroye, I.;
    Veyret, B.; et al. Decreased spontaneous electrical activity in
    neuronal networks exposed to radiofrequency 1800 MHz signals. J.
    Neurophysiol. 2018, 120, 2719–2729. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

57. Li, B.; Sun, C.; Sun, J.; Yang, M.; Zuo, R.; Liu, C.; Lan, W.; Liu,
    M.; Huang, B.; Zhou, Y. Autophagy mediates serum starvation- induced
    quiescence in nucleus pulposus stem cells by the regulation of P27.
    Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2019, 10, 118. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 658

21 of 21

58. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
    Computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing: Vienna,

Austria, 2020.

59. Wickham, H.; Averick, M.; Bryan, J.; Chang, W.; McGowan, L.D.;
    François, R.; Grolemund, G.; Hayes, A.; Henry, L.; Hester, J.;

et al. Welcome to the Tidyverse. J. Open Source Softw. 2019, 4, 1686.
[CrossRef]

60. Epstein, R.; Boulier, T.; Robertson, R.E. FreqProf: Frequency
    Proﬁles Computing and Plotting. 2016. Available online: https:

//CRAN.R-project.org/package=FreqProf (accessed on 1 October 2021).

61. Gagolewski, M. stringi: Fast and portable character string
    processing in R. Journal of Statistical Software, 2021. To appear.

Available online: https://stringi.gagolewski.com/ (accessed on 1 October
2021).

62. Pohlert, T. PMCMRplus: Calculate Pairwise Multiple Comparisons of
    Mean Rank Sums Extended. 2021. Available online: https:

//cran.r-project.org/package=PMCMRplus (accessed on 1 October 2021).

63. Piepho, H.-P. An algorithm for a letter-based representation of
    all-pairwise comparisons. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 2004, 13, 456–466.

[CrossRef]


