Temporal Dynamics in an Attractor Model of the
Songbird’s Premotor Nucleus
Fjola Hyseni, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier

To cite this version:

Fjola Hyseni, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier. Temporal Dynamics in an Attractor Model of the
Songbird’s Premotor Nucleus. COSYNE 2022 - Computational and Systems Neuroscience, Mar 2022,
Lisbon, Portugal. ￿hal-04443688￿

HAL Id: hal-04443688

https://hal.science/hal-04443688

Submitted on 7 Feb 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Temporal Dynamics in an Attractor Model 
of the Songbird’s Premotor Nucleus

Fjola Hyseni, Arthur Leblois, Nicolas P. Rougier
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IMN, UMR 5293, F-33000 Bordeaux, France 
fjola.hyseni@u-bordeaux.fr

What do songbirds tell us about timing?

2. Modiﬁng syllable duration

Temporal control is crucial for the generation of 
coordinated movements during sensorimotor tasks. 
Like human speech, birdsong relies on a tight 
muscle coordination, and songbirds have proven to 
outstandingly model the neural substrate of action 
timing. In songbirds, premotor nucleus HVC is 
responsible for the precise control of song tempo. 
Current computational models of HVC rely on 
synﬁre chains. 

Relying on a reward covariance rule, we show that the duration of a syllable can 
be modiﬁed in response to a perturbed reward proﬁle, as implemented in a widely 
used lab conditioning paradigm.

γ : learning rate parameter, , R(t): the reward, 
η: noise at the postsynaptic neuron, rj: rate of the presynaptic neuron.

eligibility trace:

Synﬁre chains are however not robust to noise and function for a 
narrow range of feedforward weights (W, see ﬁgure below), requiring ﬁne tuning 
during learning.

W = 2.8 mV

W = 3 mV

W = 3.9 mV

x
e
d
n
I

n
o
r
u
e
N

x
e
d
n
I

n
o
r
u
e
N

x
e
d
n
I

n
o
r
u
e
N

90 layers of 15 
neurons

Time (s)

Time (s)

Time (s)

2.9 mV

3.8 mV

No propagation

Timing Flexibility

Saturation

90 layers of 150 neurons

0.37 mV 0.41 mV

Ali F Pehlevan C and Olveczky. 
Nat Commun 9, 977, 2018. 

Propagation of activity in a synﬁre chain model

Attractors dynamics and timing

Here, we propose that HVC neuronal dynamics may be modelled by attractor 
dynamics, where recurrent connections allow the formation of a travelling activity 
bump with robust functional properties.

Net Connectivity Proﬁle

Feature space (x: preferred timing during song)

ΔW
Decreasing the duration

Syllable duration distribution in ms

Weight matrix

ΔW 
Increasing the duration

Changes in synaptic connectivity when the syllable is targeted for shortening vs lengthening

 Change in weights, averaged across the targeted syllables' presynaptic neurons

W(x − x′ ) = W0 + W2

− 1

2 (

x − x′ 
+ bias
σ

2
)

e

1

σ 2π

I(x, t) =

n

∑
x=1

1
n

W(x − x′ )m(x′ , t) + I 0

τ

d
dt

m(x, t) = − m(x, t) + [I(x, t) − T]+

3. Local inhibition in HVC

Local inhibition administered to the HVC.

Inhbition = α

1

σ 2π

exp

−

(

1
2 (

2

x − μ

σ )

)

Start

0.125 s

0.25 s

0.375 s

0.5 s

e
c
a
p
S
e
r
u
t
a
e
F
n

i

x
e
d
n

i

n
o
r
u
e
N

Physical space 

Feature space

i

D
s
t
a
n
c
e

Neuron index in Feature Space

Activity proﬁle (bump) in the Feature space (left) and Physical space (right).

1. Activity proﬁle in HVC

The width of the activity bump, and thus the duration of transient neuronal 
activation, can be decreased to reproduce the brief activity bursts of HVC 
neurons.

Start

0.125 s

0.25 s

0.375 s

0.5 s

Activity proﬁle (bump) across time.

0.55 s

0.625 s

0.75 s

0.875 s

1 s

The behavior of the model when we locally inhibit mimicking a Muscimol injection 
and the effect on the bump formation and consequently the song.

Conclusion

We propose that HVC neuronal dynamics may be modelled using the ring model.

The duration of a syllable can be modiﬁed in response to a perturbed reward 
proﬁle and consistent with behavioral data, the change in duration is speciﬁc to 
the target syllable.

We derive a new prediction from the model. Following local muscimol (GABAa 
agonist) injection in HVC, in contrast to the synﬁre chain, a perturbation in the 
initial phase of the pattern formation would delay song initiation, but singing 
would be sustained.

Future perspectives: 

A spiking network (with adapting LIF neurons) to replicate the  
behaviours acquired from the rate model, i.e 10ms bump width,  
learning and predicition.

References
•

Hansel, D., & Sompolinsky, H. (1998). 13 Modeling Feature Selectivity in 
Local Cortical Circuits. 69.
Ali F Pehlevan C and Olveczky. Nat Commun 9, 977, 2018. 
Williams, R. J. (1992). Machine Learning, 8(3).

•
•

•
•

•
•

Zhang, K. (1996). Journal of Neuroscience, 16(6).
Mauk, M. D., & Buonomano, D. V. (2004). Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
27(1). 
Hahnloser, R., Kozhevnikov, A. & Fee, M. Nature 419,(2002)
Brainard, M. S., & Doupe, A. J. (2002). Nature, 417(6886). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
