Analysis of Intrinsic Motivation during a Problem-Solving activity Lola
Denet, Axelle Napala, Ginna Kurmen

To cite this version:

Lola Denet, Axelle Napala, Ginna Kurmen. Analysis of Intrinsic
Motivation during a Problem-Solving activity. [0] UCA - INSPE Académie
de Nice. 2022, pp.102. ￿hal-03618803v2￿

HAL Id: hal-03618803

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03618803v2

Submitted on 28 Mar 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License

A literature review for cognitive science in education.

_________________________________________________________________________

ANALYSIS OF INTRINSIC MOTIVATION DURING A PROBLEM-SOLVING ACTIVITY

_________________________________________________________________________

French version of the text

Lola Denet

Inria Mnemosyne Team

Translation into English

Axelle Napala

Ginna Kurmen

INSPÉ- Côte d’Azur University.

MSc SmartEdTech.

Table of contents

Introduction

1 From cognition to human learning

1.1 Learning: a process and the object of a multidisciplinary study

1.1.1 Neurosciences 1.1.2 Educational sciences 1.1.3 Neuroeducation 1.2
Cognition: generalities

1.2.1 Cognition and learning 1.2.2 Knowledge and belief 1.2.3 Cognizance
and Knowledge 1.2.4 Cognizance, competence, and experience 1.2.5
Cognizance and information 1.2.6 Knowledge and cognition: conclusion

1.3 Cognition: mental functions

1.3.1 Perception 1.3.2 Attention 1.3.3 Memories 1.3.4 Reasoning 1.3.5
Executive functions 1.3.6 Language and motor skills 1.3.7 Emotions 1.3.8
Mental functions: conclusion

1.4 Metacognition

1.4.1 General information 1.4.2 How metacognition works 1.4.3
Metacognition: conclusion

1.5 De la cognition à l’apprentissage humain: conclusion

2 The role of motivation in learning

2.1 Learning process

2.1.1 Theories of human learning 2.1.2 Acquisition methods 2.1.3 Problem
resolution

2.2 Motivation

2.2.1 General Information 2.2.2 Extrinsic motivation 2.2.3 Intrinsic
motivation

2.3 The role of motivation in human learning: conclusion

3 Modeling intrinsic motivation in learning

3.1 The involvement of curiosity in learning 3.2 Computational models of
curiosity 3.2.1 Intelligent Tutoring Systems 3.2.2 Contextualization of
the algorithms 3.2.3 Presentation of algorithms

3.3 Modeling intrinsic motivation in learning: conclusion

2

4 5 5 5 6 6 7 7 7 9 10 11 12 12 13 16 18 25 35 37 40 46 46 46 47 50 50
51 51 51 59 61 70 70 75 77 79 79 80 82 82 84 86 92

3

Table of figures

The three worlds of cognition

Processing of stimuli (elaboration)

Model of how memory works

Perceptual memory according to the 5 sensory modalities

The interactions of the different memories

Memories and their locations

Memorization process

Guide to the choice of uncertainty theory

Fundamental emotions

Theories of emotional mechanisms

Theory of cognitive evaluation

Cycles of control-monitoring-control of metacognition over time

Fechner’s behavioral model

Learning according to constructivism

21st century skills

The stages of problem-solving according to Gestalt theory

Stages of problem-solving according to the cognitivist theory

Problem-solving based on the General Problem Solver theory Test-Operate-
Test-Exit Model

Problem solving based on the General Problem Solver theory and the Test-
Operate-Test-Exit model: improved version

Integrative model of motivation

Edward Deci and Richard Ryan’s theory of self-determination

Relationship between learning and curiosity

Selection of an activity in the activity space

Zone of proximal development and Flow

Example of an activity graph with evolution of the zone of proximal
development

12

14

18

19

21

22

23

34

40

42

43

47

51

54

56

61

63

67

68

73

75

80

99

100

100

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

4

Introduction

This literature review is part of the work carried out within the AIDE
(Artificial Intelligence Devoted to Education) exploratory action1. The
team at the origin of this work2 allows researchers from digital
sciences (computer science and applied mathematics), cognitive
neurosciences and education sciences to join forces within this
exploratory action to try to understand, within a specific framework,
how learners learn.

To do so, a problem solving task (CreaCube)3 is proposed to the learners
in order to collect observable data concerning the task itself, the
medium4 which is used as a learning support in the task, but also the
behavior of the learner during the resolution of the problem. The
collected information is then formalized in a symbolic way through the
development of an ontology. Lisa Roux and her collaborators (Roux et
al., 2020) have developed this ontology in order to propose a model of
the learner that takes into account the stimuli received, the discovery
of affordances5 , the making of assumptions and the contextual
knowledge. In her research report, Lisa Roux (Roux et al., 2020) defines
the concepts of beliefs, exploration and exploitation, but also the
different types of memories involved in this human learning task. The
notions of goals and commitment are also discussed.

In addition, the FLOWERS (FLOWing Epigenetic Robots and Systems)6 team
works on artificial intelligence algorithms whose goal is to propose, in
collaboration with educational teams, learning tasks adapted to the
learner’s level in order to encourage his or her commitment and thus
improve his or her progress. At the heart of their approach is the
notion of intrinsic motivation.

The work carried out by the FLOWERS team on the implications of
intrinsic motivation in human learning offers a new dimension to be
integrated into the modeling of the learner initiated by the AIDE
exploratory action. This joint work could lead to a better understanding
of the functioning of human learning, with the aim of limiting
educational inequalities while promoting the involvement of the learner
in his education.

The purpose of this review is to explore the research conducted on the
learner’s intrinsic motivation during learning in order to understand to
what extent it is involved. This will contribute to the improvement of
the learner model and thus come closer to understanding the mechanisms
of human learning.

On the other hand, it is carried out in the context of a research
internship in bio- computing with the aim of “analyzing intrinsic
motivation during a problem-solving activity”. It is, therefore, neither
exhaustive nor general, but specific to the domains treated during this
internship.

1https://www.inria.fr/fr/aide-nouvelle-action-exploratoire-chez-inria
2https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne/en/aide/
3https://creamaker.wordpress.com/ 4In the context of educational
activities in psychology and psychiatry, a medium (media in the plural)
is what characterizes the manipulable object at the origin of learning.
For example, play dough, paint, and cubes are media. 5Affordances
represent the potential and intuitive uses of an object.
6https://flowers.inria.fr/ 5

1 From cognition to human learning

How do we learn? This is one of the questions that the AIDE exploratory
action tries to answer, in a specific paradigm. But what is learning?
How can studying the functioning of the brain have an impact on
education? What about digital technologies? To what extent does it
intervene in the field of neuroscience and is it at the heart of
educational sciences? At this stage, a contextual and conceptual
clarification is necessary.

1.1 Learning: a process and the object of a multidisciplinary study

It is complex to define what “learning” is because this process can be
analyzed from different perspectives, both epistemological and
methodological. Indeed, Sylvain Connac reminds us that the act of
learning is “complex, in the sense of an interweaving of different
intellectual activities and of knowledge from various disciplines”. At
the neuro-biological level, he reminds us that the act of learning “is
expressed through the intermediary of nearly 100 billion neurons, each
neuron being potentially in synaptic connection with 10,000 others,
neighboring or distant in the brain” (Connac, 2018).

With the emergence in recent years of artificial intelligence in the
field of education, the notion of learning is enriched with a new
meaning: the ability for an algorithm to adapt its parameters from data
to automatically provide a calculation with the expected properties
(Rougier, 2015).

The collaboration between the different fields of research at the origin
of this work is then essential to try to understand this complex
process. These different disciplines meet in a common interest which is
to understand the cognitive mechanisms of the act of learning therefore
allowing the professionals of education to better understand this act of
learning, with the aim of improving the effectiveness of the tasks
proposed to the learners to support their learning.

1.1.1 Neurosciences

In 2018, Jean Frayssinhes and Florent Pasquier (Frayssinhes & Pasquier,
2018) define neuroscience as the set of disciplines related to the study
of the brain and identify those that play an important role in
educational research. They cite cognitive neuroscience, computational
neuroscience, pedagogy inspired by cognitive neuroscience, and affective
and social neurosciences. While cognitive neuroscience attempts to link
the nervous system (brain mechanisms) and cognition, neuro-pedagogy
allows us to understand the construction of intelligence in the brain as
well as the effects of fundamental learning. Regarding affective and
social neurosciences, they study the role of emotions and the importance
of the social aspect in learning.

Finally, computational neuroscience seeks to develop models to simulate
brain function. In the research context of this review, the working
hypothesis is that this last discipline (in association with the others)
can allow to model the learner during a learning task and consequently
to understand the neural-mechanisms involved in learning.

6

1.1.2 Educational sciences

Philippe Meirieu7 bases himself on the history of the educational
sciences to identify the disciplines they cover8. He recalls that the
sciences of education were born between 1967 and 1970, in the case of
France9 , with the aim of bringing these disciplines together. Before
the creation of the educational sciences, it was pedagogy that focused
more on the concrete, practical aspect of education, in a way that cut
across disciplines. Then, education was based on development from the
point of view of psychology. Today, the educational sciences allow us to
work together on the question of “how to learn”. Psychology, sociology,
anthropology, linguistics, economics, history and philosophy are
involved in the educational sciences because they participate in the
study of learning. This is in line with what Louis Marmoz of the
University of Caen wrote in a concept note for the French review of
pedagogy published by the French Institute of Education10. The sciences
of education therefore constitute a multidisciplinary field of research
concerning “educational realities”.

1.1.3 Neuroeducation

Cognitive Neuroscience and Sciences of Education merge together through
work in neuroeducation related to educational issues. The objective is
to better understand how the brain works during learning and to
determine better educational methods. On the other hand, neuroeducation
allows us to overcome “myths in education, recognized as false beliefs,
assertions without empirical basis” (Connac, 2018).

According to the Neuroeducation Research Association11, neuroeducation
“is a complementary approach to approaches such as cognitivism,
constructivism and behaviourism. […] What distinguishes neuroeducation
from other approaches is that it situates its analysis of educational
problems at the brain level, using brain imaging techniques”.

The areas of research outlined above then take on their full meaning in
the establishment of a model of the learner, within a specific task.
Indeed, it is necessary to understand what constitutes a learner in his
or her globality and complexity in order to try to understand how the
learning process works in a specific case.

It is in this sense that the Mnemosyne and FLOWERS teams are joining
forces within the AIDE exploratory action. Mnemosyne researchers are
working both in the field of neuroscience to better understand how the
brain works and in the field of digital science to improve artificial
intelligence algorithms based on human functioning.

As part of its research work, the FLOWERS team creates artificial
intelligence algorithms in the context of educational sciences. The aim
is to promote learning by adapting the level to each learner through the
use of these algorithms during dedicated tasks defined in collaboration
with teachers.

7https://www.meirieu.com/BIOGRAPHIE/biographie.htm
8https://www.meirieu.com/COURS/pedaetscienceseduc.pdf 9In the Anglophone
context, learning sciences began to develop in the 1980s as an
interdisciplinary field (Lee, 2018).
10http://ife.ens-lyon.fr/publications/edition-electronique/revue-francaise-de-
pedagogie/INRP_RF043_5.pdf
11https://www.associationneuroeducation.org/a-propos 7

The association of these teams and their work could lead to a model as
close as possible to the human learning process and thus to a better
understanding of how learning works in order to try to improve its
methods.

1.2 Cognition: generalities

1.2.1 Cognition and learning

The word “cognition” or “cognitive processes” comes from the Latin
cognitio which means knowledge or the action of learning (Lieury, 2017).
Cognition includes major mental functions such as perception, memory,
language, reasoning, executive functions, motor skills, etc. It is also
involved in learning and emotions. (Connac, 2018).

Sylvain Connac quotes this definition for the act of learning: “Learning
is all at once grasping by the mind, acquiring knowledge, integrating
new data into an existing structure, constructing by the transformation
of new representations and new knowledge, and modifying a behavior”
(Connac, 2018).

Cognition referring to the concept of “knowledge”provokes the following
question: what is knowledge? At first, this question may seem useless
because this term is commonly used and certainly everyone thinks he or
she knows what knowledge is or at least what this word means. However,
to define, to give a univocal meaning to the concept of knowledge is
more difficult than it seems because according to the point of view, the
discipline or the beliefs, knowledge is polysemous. When the subject of
research is to understand how a learner learns and when it is approached
by different fields of research as it is the case here, including in
relation to machine learning, it seems essential to find a univocal
definition for this concept in order to establish a common base on which
to build and avoid misunderstandings.

1.2.2 Knowledge and belief

According to Christian Godin, knowledge could be: “a mental faculty
producing an assimilation by the mind of an objective content previously
translated into signs and ideas” (Godin, 2004). This definition refers
to the mental functions discussed in the definition of cognition.

In connection with knowledge, Marie Gasc defines the symbolic function
as “the capacity to evoke objects or even absent events through mental
representations and by means of signifiers to express signifieds” (Gasc,
2016). For this, it is based on the initial definition of Jean Piaget:
“specific connection between signifiers and signifieds”. An object, an
event or a conceptual scheme12 are examples of signifieds whereas
language, a mental image or a symbolic gesture are examples of
signifiers.

Another aspect of the definition of knowledge written by Christian Godin
specifies for the symbolic function, that it would be “the result of
this operation. Knowledge is a symbolic possession of things. It
includes an infinity of degrees” (Godin, 2004). The symbolic function

12According to Kant, a schema is “a process or means by which a pure
concept becomes effective by the implication of an intuition”. 8

would intervene then as the process allowing a signified to become a
knowledge in the case where this one can be qualified by signifiers.

It is possible to establish a link with the point of view of Jean Piaget
recalled by Jean- Michel Besnier. According to him, knowledge would be
“the linking of a subject and an object by the means of an operative
structure” (Besnier, 2021).. This can make us think of the structure of
a RDF (Resource Description Framework) triplet, a symbolic formalism
used during the ontological modeling of the learner in the work
introduced previously. In an RDF triplet, the subject is the resource to
be described, the predicate is the property applied to the subject and
the object is a data property value. Following this reasoning, it would
then be possible to represent knowledge in a symbolic way using this
method.

Jean-Michel Besnier specifies that “the structures in question may
belong: 1/ to the subject; 2/ to the object; 3/ to both the subject and
the object; 4/ exclusively to their relation; or 5/ to neither of them”.
This represents a logical way of explaining the act of knowing that does
not completely suit the theory of knowledge because it does not limit
itself to describing the structure that conditions the production of
truth; it also seeks to evaluate the part that belongs to the subject
and the object in the constitution of a knowledge" (Besnier, 2021). In
philosophy, an alternative then arises: “either knowledge is only the
result of the registration in the subject of information already
organized in the external world, or it is produced by the subject who
possesses the faculty to arrange the immediate data of perception”
(Besnier, 2021).

There are several opposing philosophical currents concerning knowledge
and its implications. According to the empiricists, knowledge is not
innate, it comes entirely from experience through the intermediary of
senses, impressions, ideas. Conversely, rationalists such as Kant and
Schopenhauer believe that knowledge is intrinsic to the individual: “It
pertains to the Being and the singular” (Frayssinhes, 2019). The
positivists indicate that “the knowing subject is unrealistic (outside
of reality), knowledge being an extraction of the content of this one”
while the constructivists estimate “that the knowing individual creates
his own reality, so that it is not external” (Frayssinhes, 2019).

By pursuing research from the philosophical point of view, there is no
consensus on a definition of knowledge in a general way (even if it will
be possible to arrive at an operational definition a little further on).
A definition has however been identified and then refuted by Plato.
Knowledge would then be a “true and justified belief” (Chappell, 2019).
Philosophers who have tried to complete this definition have come up
against various inconsistencies that have caused them to return to the
initial definition, even though it is considered incomplete. Plato had
refuted it because it is possible that a belief is true without the
individual being able to demonstrate it.

Serge Goldman studies the different aspects of belief and makes the link
with cognition. He gives a first definition of belief from the point of
view of cognitive neuroscience. Belief would then be “a conscious
process [intentional] by which a subject adheres to perceptions or
elaborations not verified by the senses” (Goldman, 2005). Belief implies
the active adoption of a choice". This choice is influenced by the
intervention of mental functions such as perception or memory (to
mention only these two). Belief takes on different aspects depending on
the mental function involved. It is not only influenced by the
environment and learning but also by previously acquired knowledge.

9

The definition of knowledge previously identified says that knowledge
is “a true and justified belief”. As knowledge would be linked to
belief, it results from mental functions and context (environment,
socio-cultural milieu, etc.). Belief is therefore subjective, specific
to the individual or to a group of individuals. It can be a hypothesis
that is objectified by verification, demonstration or observation. Once
objectified, it would then become knowledge.

If a belief can become knowledge, it can also remain a belief whether it
is true or false. In this sense, it can be perceived as true for the
person who believes. Does this then make it individual knowledge that
exists only through the prism of that person? More precisely, can a
belief perceived as true by a person be qualified as knowledge in an
objective way if it is true only for the person who believes it to be
true? Moreover, does knowledge necessarily pass through the stage of
belief? These different aspects show the difficulty of giving a univocal
meaning to knowledge since it is visibly dependent on the context, on
prior knowledge and on the mental functions engaged and specific to the
individual.

The point of view of the educational sciences on knowledge is also
addressed by Jean Frayssinhes in an article in which he distinguishes
between different concepts that are often confused: cognizance,
knowledge, competence and experience.

1.2.3 Cognizance and Knowledge

According to him, cognizance is constructed by the individual learner
(as a knowing subject) and is not absolute. The knowing subject, faced
with an external reality, internalizes, understands and appropriates
knowledge according to his mental states (thought). Jean Frayssinhes
writes that the learner “transforms this knowledge into cognizance”
(Frayssinhes, 2019). He specifies that by “building this cognizance, it
allows him to have an exact idea of a reality, of its situation, of its
meaning, of its characters, of its functioning” (Frayssinhes, 2019).
Consequently, cognizance cannot be perfect since it is not identical
from one individual to another. “The dissimilarity of the perception of
reality by the thought intrinsic to each one” (Frayssinhes, 2019) shows
that there are several degrees of reality which implies several degrees
of cognizance. This confirms that “cognizance is constructed through our
experiences and is not transmitted”. It is however possible that several
individuals have knowledge on the same reality. Cognizances evolve
through experience and reflexivity and can be influenced by prior
cognizances. It depends on the context and can be contradicted or
"transposed from one problem to another ’’ (Frayssinhes, 2019).

Jean Frayssinhes defines knowledge as “a data, a concept, a procedure or
a method that exists at a given time, outside of any knowing subject,
and that is generally codified in reference works” (Frayssinhes, 2019)..
Constituted knowledge is cognizance that has been established by a
community. “Knowledge is depersonalized, decontextualized, de-
temporalized. It is formulated, formalized, validated and memorized. It
can be linearized, which corresponds to its textual nature”
(Frayssinhes, 2019).The author specifies that there are four types of
knowledge that “represent the optimum of what an individual can learn”:

● Knowledge and procedures are formalized knowledge. ● Know-how and
experiences refer to acting knowledge. ● The appropriation or
elaboration of concepts is intellectual knowledge. ● Know-how-to-be
refers to what allows an individual to adapt to various situations.

10

Cognizance is thus an active process of production according to a
situation, whereas knowledge is the result of this process and depends
on the institution. “The quality of knowledge depends on the process of
cognizance used to produce it, and the value of knowledge depends on the
epistemic quality of the process that generated it”. Therefore, “valid
theoretical-empirical processes produce true knowledge, and those that
are not, false or uncertain knowledge” (Frayssinhes, 2019).

Wikipedia contributors have used the work of Ryle Gil-Bert and Bertrand
Russell 13 to define three types of knowledge in order to show a form of
consensus in philosophical views. They are propositional cognizance,
know-how and object cognizance (or acquaintance).

“Propositional cognizance is the fact of knowing that a certain
proposition is true, for example,””knowing that the Earth is round”“.
This cognizance is objectively true without having been individually
verified.”Know-how is the fact of being able to succeed in an action,
for example, ““to know how to make a waffle””. This is similar to the
definition of Jean Frayssinhes quoted above. “Object cognizance, also
called acquaintance, is the fact of knowing a particular thing, for
example,””knowing Paris"".

Here, the distinction between knowing and taking cognizance is put
forward. Indeed, in the first two types of cognizance defined, knowledge
is cognizance established either by the community (the Earth is round)
or by actions conforming to a reference (knowing how to make a waffle).
In the last definition, it is not a question of knowledge but of
cognizance because it depends on individuality (two people can know
Paris without necessarily basing themselves on the same references).

Knowledge is a state fixed by a community in the respect of its
discipline and its social practices. Cognizance is characterized by
properties of cognition unlike knowledge which has semantic and
syntactic properties.

1.2.4 Cognizance, competence, and experience

Beyond cognizance, Jean Frayssinhes quotes the High Council on Education
which

defined competencies as “a combination of cognizances, aptitude and
attitudes”. He dissociates three types of competences:

● Academic competencies are also referred to as cognitive knowledge. ●
Technical and methodological competences or know-how. ● Behavioral or
social competences (soft skills) are associated with knowing how

to be.

Competence is built over time by mobilizing different resources. It is
the “capacity to act effectively in a defined type of situation, a
capacity that is based on knowledge, but is not reduced to it. It is
realized in the action. It does not pre-exist it” (Frayssinhes, 2019).
Competence is learned through individual and social capacities. It
cannot be dissociated from an activity (operative and finalized
competence). It is structured by action (knowing, wanting and being able
to act). It is not directly observable but has manifestations and
consequences that are (abstract and hypothetical competence).
Competency-based learning

13https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connaissance_(philosophie) 11

makes it possible to define the prerequisite knowledge required by the
learner, as well as the degree of mastery of that knowledge in a
particular context.”Competencies thus provide an abundant semantic
reference, which is essential for the relevant adaptation of learning to
the learner’s expectations and needs" (Frayssinhes, 2019). Indeed, the
learning objective, the means to be implemented to reach it as well as
the process allowing the treatment of knowledge can thus be specified by
this semantic referencing.

Experience can be distinguished according to two definitions. According
to Jean Frayssinhes, experience is the “fact of acquiring […] or
developing knowledge of beings and things by their practice and by a
more or less long confrontation of oneself with the world. [Experience]
can also be an observed fact [intended] to verify a hypothesis or to
study phenomena” (Frayssinhes, 2019). Experience can be constructed by
induction, based on practice, analysis, and reflection, or by deduction
when it is based on theories or concepts and is transformed into action
after their implementation. Jean Frayssinhes quotes Oscar Wilde saying
that “experience is the name that everyone gives to their mistakes”
(Frayssinhes, 2019). This implies that it is dependent on time,
situations, repeated practice, trial and error, and that it cannot be
transferred to another person. Competencies acquired through action, and
whose results and performances reach an identified level of requirement
can then be qualified as experiences.

By dissociating and clarifying these terms, Jean Frayssinhes sheds light
on what differentiates them but also on what links them. This highlights
the fact that learning is a complex process made up of nuances and
concepts that are as different as they are close.

1.2.5 Cognizance and information

Anh Nguyen-Xuan’s expertise in the field of cognitive psychology and
artificial intelligence brings a new perspective to the understanding of
the mechanisms of cognition and cognizance.

She studies the human cognitive system as “an information processing
system” (Nguyen-Xuan, 2021). To do this, she explains that it is
essential to define certain fundamental concepts. She starts with the
concept of information. An information would be a data which brings
cognizance. It is then dependent on a situation, on the actors who
participate in it and their prior knowledge.

Bruno Chaudet differentiates the terms data, information and knowledge
that make sense in the previous definition. According to him “a data is
a raw element, which has not yet been interpreted, put into context”
(Chaudet, 2009). He continues by specifying that an analyzed,
interpreted data becomes an information, which would make knowledge “an
understood information, that is to say assimilated and used, which
allows it to lead to an action”. He bases himself on the work of Nonaka
and Takeuchi (two experts in knowledge management) to dissociate tacit
knowledge from explicit knowledge. Tacit knowledge is linked to
experience or intuition: “it is not formalized and difficult to
transmit”. On the contrary, explicit knowledge is “formalized and
transmissible”.

According to the theory of knowledge14, Edgar Morin says that "relevant
knowledge is that which is capable of situating any information in its
context, and if possible in the whole

14Philosophy of knowledge. 12

in which it fits. [Knowledge progresses mainly […] through the capacity
to contextualize and globalize […] Knowledge is knowledge only as an
organization that puts information in relation and in context" (Morin,
1999, Morin, 2011). This joins the points of view previously presented
on the source of knowledge. However, here there is only one type of
knowledge, whereas Bruno Chaudet presents two.

In addition, Anh Nguyen-Xuan makes the link between knowledge and
memories, citing in particular declarative knowledge and procedural
knowledge in connection with memories of the same nature, while we could
add the notion of episodic knowledge which is made up of memories of
events experienced with their context (date, place, emotional state).

1.2.6 Knowledge and cognition: conclusion

After exploring different points of view and aspects of knowledge in the
context of cognition, without reducing things to a single, restricted
vision, each contribution allowed us to move towards a more global
understanding of what is involved in human learning.

Moreover, it is possible to identify points common to these various
points of view. Whether it is a question of the couple
signifier/signified or subject/object, there is in both cases a duality:
duality between the concept associated with the sign and the form or
aspect of the sign, versus duality between the subject who constructs
cognizance on the object. This duality is linked by a relation, which
defines a process or a structure that allows the formalization of
knowledge, of a subject in relation to an object, or of meta-knowledge
on the subject’s knowledge. This observation leads us to consider the
interest of ontological formalism to model the concepts introduced in
this report: it is a question of representing binary relations between
these concepts. The environment can also be interpreted as the reality
external to the individual. On the other hand, an agreement is found on
the individual character of knowledge, whether it is influenced by
thought in the sense of mental states or by belief. Moreover, it is
constructed and can evolve over time.

In the course of this reflection, the involvement of mental functions in
cognizance and cognition has often been mentioned but never specified.
For example, Anh Nguyen-Xuan declines the concept of knowledge according
to the different types of memories. It now seems relevant to define the
different mental functions that constitute cognition and that are
involved in the human learning process. This will also allow us to
understand the link that Anh Nguyen-Xuan makes between knowledge and
memories.

On the other hand, the phenomenological presentation of these notions
contributes to the elaboration of an ontology with the aim of being able
to manipulate them formally. This formalization was initiated by Lisa
Roux in 2020 (Roux et al., 2020) within the framework of the exploratory
action AIDE. Still in this context, Chloé Mercier is revising and
continuing the work initiated (Mercier et al., 2021b).

1.3 Cognition: mental functions

Mental functions or cognitive processes are at the origin of the
processing of information allowing, among other things, learning. The
information processing process concerns both the perception of
information and its analysis or even its processing through the various
memories.

13

1.3.1 Perception

According to Alain Lieury, perception “designates the set of
neurobiological and psychological mechanisms whose function is to take
information from the environment or from the organism itself” (Lieury,
2017). This definition joins the point of view of cognitive psychology.
According to Marianne Habib and her collaborators, perception
“corresponds to the cognitive activity by which the human being becomes
aware of his environment, that is to say by which he receives and
interprets the information that surrounds him” (Habib et al., 2018). In
order to be processed by the cognitive system, information must first be
perceived in order to reach the final stage which is mental
representation.

A representation is “a symbolic unit constructed and stored in the
cognitive system. Any information stored in the cognitive system is a
representation. The same object can give rise to a multitude of
representations: pictorial representation, verbal representation,
perceptual representation…” (Habib et al., 2018). Perceptual
representations encompass several types of representations linked to
perception by the senses. They can be related to the perceptions of a
single sense (a single modality) or be multi-modal by combining several
sensory perceptions.

Perception is possible thanks to the existence of different sensory
receptors that allow us to perceive both external and internal stimuli.
A stimulation (or stimulus) corresponds to “any external element,
i.e. belonging to the physical world, which has the power to excite
specific receptors of a given sensory modality” (Habib et al., 2018).
The sensory systems are in fact the senses. Each sense has a particular
sensory input modality (visual, auditory, tactile, gustatory or
olfactory) used to perceive stimuli. The perception is then dependent on
the sensation, that is, the sensory receptors which receive the stimulus
from the external environment. In this, perception can be different from
one individual to another because the sensory receptors are individual.
Thus, the same stimulus can be perceived differently by two individuals
located in the same external environment.

Figure 1 - The three worlds of cognition. This figure is a diagram drawn
by Frédéric Alexandre (Alexandre, 2021). It represents the three worlds
involved in cognitive functions and consequently in learning. Perception
is thus embodied.

In addition, Frédéric Alexandre highlights the relationships that exist
between the

14

external environment, the internal environment and the body, a third
world at the border of the two previous ones. He explains that it is
essential to take into account these three worlds (brain, body,
environment) to study cognitive functions (Alexandre, 2021).

In Figure 1, Frédéric Alexandre shows that the learner is not only a
brain interacting with an external environment but also a body through
which the internal environment is related to the external environment.
External perception is composed of perception and proprioception15 . It
allows the body to interact with the external world and is expressed by
external responses. As for interoception, it allows the body to feel
internal states, which triggers internal responses.

The person is then made up of a brain + body system (acting and
learning) present in the external environment. The internal states
represent the needs of this person manifested in the internal
environment of the body. It is the flow of sensory and motor information
between these worlds that allows the satisfaction of needs16.

This makes sense with the notion of sensory receptors mentioned earlier.
Indeed, the receptors at the origin of perception are located on the
extended body and allow the reception of stimuli sent by objects or
agents present in the external environment. On the other hand, the
internal environment can also transmit stimuli through sensations
perceived in the internal body (interoception). These stimuli may
correspond to fundamental needs related to the homeostatic functioning
of the internal body. The emotions are responses to these internal or
external stimuli. They are also involved in learning (these notions will
be discussed in more detail later).

Moreover, Figure 2 shows that there are two types of processing of a
stimulus. Indeed, it can be bottom-down (ascending) or top-down
(descending). In the first case, “the information processings are guided
by the stimulation, the environment, which find their origin” while in
the second, the processings “are guided by the knowledge of the
individual, they find their origin in the previously learned knowledge
of the individual” (Habib et al., 2018).

The authors point out that a cognitive process involves both types of
processing in most cases but at different levels. The latter can be
qualified as “high level” in the case where the processing is mainly
top-down. The quantity of mental operations is then important and the
more important it is, the higher the level of elaboration because it
calls upon the learner’s prior knowledge. Conversely, bottom-down
processing is mainly based on the environment and stimuli, which reduces
the number of mental operations. It is therefore associated, most of the
time, with a low level of elaboration. In all cases, it is the number of
mental operations involved in the process that determines the level of
elaboration.

This supports the fact that a stimulus can be perceived differently from
one individual

to another since its processing can be influenced by prior knowledge.

15Perception of one’s own body. 16“Altogether, this defines the sensory
and motor information flows of a brain + body system, acting and
learning in the external environment to satisfy some needs, expressed as
internal states” (Alexandre, 2021). 15

Figure 2 - Processing of stimuli (elaboration).

This diagram is inspired by a figure made by Marianne Habib and her
colleagues [Habib et al.,2018]. It represents the two types of
processing that can be applied during a cognitive process.

On the other hand, perceptual processing may differ according to the
intention. When it comes to recognizing an object, the cognitive system
links “a perceptual representation of the object (which does not yet
have meaning) with information contained in semantic and episodic
memory” (Habib et al., 2018). The authors state that it is not always
necessary to recognize an object in order to act on it. Moreover, the
perceptual treatments used to recognize an object would be independent
of those that guide the action.

There are different types of perception that integrate several
modalities other than the sensory ones. This is the case in the
perception of space, time and quantity which interact with each other.
Indeed, experiments have shown that the perception of quantity is
related to the perception of space “observable on the motor responses of
the subjects” (Habib et al., 2018).

“These behavioral data are supported by brain imaging and
electrophysiological studies that have been able to reveal shared
physiological bases for encoding digital and spatial magnitude” (Habib
et al., 2018). For example, the parietal cortex is involved in both
these bases and in action guidance.

Similarly, the perception of time and space are linked because spatial

representations can impact the perception of time.

These three dimensions of perception are thus linked to each other.
Consequently, a modification of one could generate modifications on the
others. This can be observed by the modification of the action performed
in response (for example: increase or decrease of the reaction time).

There are other dimensions of perception that do not depend only on
sensory modalities and can incorporate "proprioceptive representations,
contextual information,

16

emotions, etc." (Habib et al., 2018). Furthermore, it is established
that action is not only a motor response (output) and that it can also
influence perceptions. Action and perception cannot therefore be
considered independently of each other.

These notions allow us to shed light on the interpretation of the
learner’s behavior when participating in a problem-solving task such as
CreaCube17. It will then be possible to link the stimuli provoked by the
task and the learner’s behavior when perceiving these stimuli. An
ontology established on this basis could also make it possible to infer
the learner’s perceptions given the observations collected. The
inferences made at this level are intended to allow the modeling of the
learner to better understand learning (Mercier et al., 2021b). In the
longer term, they could allow the adaptation of the task by optimizing
the elements shared with the learner, as is the case for applications
with algorithmic assistants carried by the FLOWERS18 Project-team
(Clément et al., 2014b).

1.3.2 Attention

The behavioral reactions observed in the above-mentioned experiments
concerning the study of perception are also related to attentional
processes. Indeed, attention is a spontaneous cognitive process that
allows the sorting of perceived information (entering the cognitive
system) in order not to overload the cognitive system by identifying
relevant and useful information in a given context. However, it does not
only have a sorting function. Pascale Toscani and her collaborators
recall the neuroscientific point of view that proposes three main
functions with identified circuits: that of alertness (or vigilance),
that of filtering (or orientation) and that of executive control
(Toscani et al., 2017).

Vigilance allows a rapid reaction to an event in connection with
noradrenaline (neurotransmitter with accelerating effects on the body).
This form of attention “has a particular rhythm, circadian, endogenous,
which can vary during the seasons and especially can be disturbed by our
daily activities” (Toscani et al., 2017). Cognitive functions used in
daily activities can be less efficient and generate fatigue if the
rhythm of these activities does not match the personal rhythm of
alertness. “The fatigue generated particularly alters our attention and
memory” (Toscani et al., 2017). Conversely, over-concentration (over-
solicitation of attention) can alter personal rhythm by disrupting
sleep, for example. On the other hand, this form of attention allows for
a quick reaction of the individual in case of stress.

The filtering function refers to what was discussed in the first part of
this paper concerning attention. Indeed, this function makes it possible
to identify the most relevant stimuli according to personal objectives.
This function is also called orientation because the body reacts
spontaneously (eye movement for example) in the direction of the stimuli
identified as pertinent. This process is not intentional. In addition,
it uses different filters that allow the selection of stimuli. They can
be innate (shapes, colors, movements), linked to “pre-wired” neural
circuits or acquired (learned by experience, for example the first
name), thanks to learning. Thus, attention is shaped over time by the
environment and experiences. Besides, "the voluntary detour of attention
and management of distractors is acquired progressively from 4-6 months
of age. The ability to direct attention is developed in conjunction with
sensory acuity during the first year and then continuously from
childhood to

17https://creamaker.wordpress.com/
18https://flowers.inria.fr/research/kidlearn/ 17

adolescence" (Toscani et al., 2017). Therefore, it is possible to say
that a learner with the goal of solving a task will be able to
voluntarily direct his or her attention to the task and identify the
elements that constitute it. These abilities could vary from learner to
learner depending on age, environment, experience and prior knowledge.

Executive attention “allows us to regulate our attention by selecting
mental processes. It can involve consciousness and time-program our
cognitive functions (such as working memory, cognitive flexibility, and
cognitive inhibition that allows for the management of cognitive
conflicts” (Toscani et al., 2017). This process differs from the first
because it is conscious19 , i.e., intentional. The learner can then
choose to direct his or her attention to certain stimuli identified as
useful for solving the task. This form of attention differs from the
filtering function in that it is slower acting due to the involvement of
the prefrontal regions of the brain, which are further away from the
regions dedicated to perception, which are rather in the parietal areas.
It can however “influence perception […] by creating filtering biases,
forcing the search for certain features” (Toscani et al., 2017), which
is an example of the top- down process previously mentioned.

Pascale Toscani reminds us, moreover, that attention and memorization
develop together. She cites this example: “by acting on perception,
attention will influence the encoding of the context of memories and
conversely the context associated with a memory will influence the way
in which we pay attention to it during recall” (Toscani et al., 2017).
The influence it addresses concerns both long-term memory and working
memory by increasing the number of items retained for a few seconds.
This allows “to keep in mind the goals to be pursued, the projects to be
carried out and the information related to them” (Toscani et al., 2017).

Attention has its limits. Indeed, Pascale Toscani cites distraction and
inattentional blindness as these limits, opposed to each other: “on the
one hand, hyper distractibility makes us unfit for a given task but
allows us to take in all solicitations, and on the other hand,
hyperfocusing allows us to be efficient on the task but blind to what
surrounds us” (Toscani et al., 2017)

In addition, Patrick Lemaire explains that the resources allocated to
attention are limited, which implies that it can only be distributed
over a very limited number of tasks. He mentions the possibility of
automating processes through learning. Thus the repetition of certain
processes can lead to the automation of this one (driving for example).
This allows the distribution of attentional resources differently from
one task to another since an automated process requires much less
attentional resources. To avoid overloading the cognitive system, it is
recommended to distribute attentional resources over time. For example,
it will be possible to combine an automated and a non-automated process
(driving and holding a conversation, for example) over the same period
of time, but there will be an overload of the cognitive system if the
two tasks in progress are not automated (reading a manual and holding a
conversation, for example) (Lemaire & Didierjean, 2018). Moreover,
Pascale Toscani agrees with this point of view and specifies that this
distribution of

19From the cognitivist point of view, consciousness is divided into two
forms: “On one hand, ‘cognitive’ consciousness, characterized by its
reference (‘intentionality’) to ‘real’ or abstract objects, bringing
into play languages, calculations, forms of memory and long-term
exploration, associated with oriented behaviors; on the other hand,
consciousness as a lived experience, a subjective experience
characterized uniquely, not by an object, but by its intrinsic
properties, its quality” (Delacour, 2001). 18

attentional resources is called attentional flexibility and that it
“allows switching from one task to another” (Toscani et al., 2017)
insofar as part of these tasks is automated. The author specifies that
“competing tasks must be maintained in working memory, which implies an
additional cognitive load” (Toscani et al., 2017).

These limitations imply that the instructions given to the learner
during a problem- solving task should not be multiplied. In the context
of the CreaCube task (presented in the introduction), it is relevant to
state the instruction even before presenting the cubes that will be used
to solve it in order to avoid multiplying the stimuli and to not
overload the learner’s cognitive system (listening to and understanding
the instruction + recognizing the shapes and colors of the cubes). The
distribution of these tasks over time will allow the learner to better
understand the problem to be solved in his environment.

1.3.3 Memories

The stimuli perceived in the external and internal environment through
the body are identified and filtered by the attentional process. These
are the first steps in information processing. On several occasions, the
involvement of memory in the different processes discussed above has
been mentioned. Indeed, the storage of identified and filtered
information is made possible thanks to memory. The duration of storage
is different according to the type of memory involved. It is admitted
that there is not one but several memories characterized by the duration
of storage and also by the cerebral regions involved and the type of
processing which is carried out there. It is then a question of
short-term memory and long-term memory which are themselves
differentiated into other “subtypes” of memory.

Short-term memory and working memory

General Information

According to Marianne Habib, short-term memory “concerns all the
processes that allow us to maintain active and manipulate the
information necessary for current activities here and now” (Habib et
al., 2018). She differentiates 3 types of information that feed short-
term memory: information perceived by sensory modalities, information
from long-term memory (previous experiences) and information resulting
from cognitive activities taking place within short-term memory. This
information can be used for reasoning for example, or be directed to
long-term memory in order to be mobilized later. Short-term memory is a
crucial cognitive function because it is involved in all other functions
even though its storage time is of the order of a few seconds. This is
represented in figure 3.

In the literature, the terms “short-term memory” and “working memory”
are often used interchangeably. However, the former refers to the length
of time that information is stored in memory. Working memory is
“short-term” because the information is stored for only a few seconds.
Furthermore, there is also talk of “perceptual memory” which is not
always differentiated. These divergences do not cast doubt on the
short-term memory functioning but rather on the differences in the
classifications of concepts.

Here, the choice is made to consider the perceptive memory and the
working memory as short-term memories. This will allow us to make the
stages of information

19

processing clearer.

Figure 3 - Model of how memory works. This figure is a reproduction of
the diagram by Marianne Habib [Habib et al., 2018]. It represents the
general functioning of memory.

Perceptual memory

Perceptual memory is, as its name indicates, linked to perception, to
sensory modalities. It is thus differentiated according to these five
modalities. This is represented in Figure 4. It allows us to retain
sensory stimuli for a very short time in order to be able to process
them later in the working memory. It functions automatically, without
the individual’s knowledge20.

It allows us to memorize what results from perception without
necessarily knowing its meaning (which results from semantic memory).
According to Joseph Stordeur this memory is implicit and “keeps a trace
of any percept encountered rather quickly. This is what is called the
phenomenon of priming. That is to say that the initial presentation of a
percept […] facilitates the subsequent recognition of this percept, even
in a more complex context” (Stordeur, 2014). It is then possible to say
that it interacts with semantic and episodic memory.

Lisa Roux (Roux et al., 2020) refers to perceptual (or sensory memory)
as the place where incoming information is encoded. It is only when this
information is filtered as useful that it can be stored in working
memory.

Working memory

Lisa Roux specifies that working memory (operational memory) is not only
limited to a storage of information limited in time but also to its
processing. The latter "makes it possible to keep the information useful
for the processing operations involved in the

20https://www.inserm.fr/dossier/memoire/ 20

performance of the task, by updating them as they progress" (Roux et
al., 2020).

Pascale Toscani makes the same observation. The latter would be
“characterized by a very limited retention, a reduced capacity (empan21
between 5 and 9 items to be processed at the same time) and a
sensitivity to interference (noise …)” (Toscani et al., 2017). According
to the author, the working memory would be considered as “a cognitive
system that is used to perform more complex tasks such as calculating,
understanding, comparing, deciding, identifying, solving, checking… […]
it mobilizes important attentional resources” (Toscani et al., 2017).

Figure 4 - Perceptual memory according to the 5 sensory modalities. This
figure is a diagram created by the B2V Memory Observatory. It represents
the perceptive memory according to the five sensory modalities.

Moreover, Éric Tardif explains that working memory develops over the
years in connection with the maturation of the central nervous system,
beyond cognitive development and therefore in connection with
neurological developments. During the latter, the loss of information
between the encoding of a piece of information and its recall would be
decreased, the storage capacity would be increased as well as the
processing speed22 (Tardif & Doudin, 2016).

Long-term memory

Marianne Habib indicates that unlike short-term memory, long-term memory
allows

21In cognitive psychology, “the span is the limited amount of
information (words, numbers etc.) that can be stored in short-term
memory”. (Miller, 1956). 22Storage capacity increases mainly between 3
and 8 years of age and then more slowly until adulthood (up to 4 or 6
items between 3 and 8 years and up to 7 items in adulthood). As for
information processing, the period with the greatest evolution is
between 6 and 13 years old (Tardif & Doudin, 2016). 21

the storage of information for several years, even throughout life (for
a memory having had a strong emotional “impact” for example or which was
requested by the recall with strong memory traces). It is also not
possible to set a quantitative limit on the storage capacity of this
type of memory23. She distinguishes three types of long-term memory:
procedural memory, semantic memory, and episodic memory.

Procedural memory

According to Marianne Habib, procedural memory allows the storage of
know-how. Pascale Toscani specifies that this type of memory “is
acquired by repeating a task” (Toscani et al., 2017). These skills are
acquired as a result of “motor procedures” (Habib et al., 2018,) and
allow various activities to be carried out. It is an implicit and
non-declarative memory, that is to say it is automatic and it is
difficult to explain an activity that uses procedural memory (cycling,
walking, driving …) . Its automatic nature allows it not to mobilize a
lot of cognitive resources. As mentioned when defining the concept of
attention, the cognitive resources or attentional resources that can be
mobilized simultaneously are limited. So it is difficult to accumulate
tasks unless one of these tasks is an “automatic” activity (pertaining
to procedural memory).

Semantic memory

Pascale Toscani explains that semantic memory “allows knowledge to be
linked together to make sense of it” (Toscani et al., 2017). According
to Marianne Habib, the information stored in semantic memory is not
linked to a context (place or period) and is abstract. It is an explicit
and declarative memory because it is possible to put words to the stored
information (Habib et al., 2018) (being able to define a word and relate
it to related information, for example). Éric Tardif says that “semantic
memory constitutes our repertoire of knowledge of the world” (Tardif &
Doudin, 2016). Marianne Habib describes it as “a kind of dictionary (of
common and proper names)” (Habib et al., 2018). Moreover, Joseph
Stordeur specifies that “to function well, semantic memory must be
organized, hierarchical, structured” (Stordeur, 2014). According to him,
this is essential in order to be able to efficiently access the
knowledge stored there.

Episodic memory

According to Marianne Habib, episodic memory stores events and is linked
to time and space. It is declarative and explicit. Éric Tardif adds that
episodic memory can be accidental or voluntary (Tardif & Doudin, 2016).
Moreover, the memories stored there “have a narrative structure (with a
beginning, middle and end) and involve mental representation” (Habib et
al., 2018). The author states that this mental representation is a
function of sensory perceptions and emotions. “The affective component
is closely related to episodic memory, and memories associated with
affect are more robust than neutral (non-affective) memories” (Habib et
al., 2018). This is in contrast to the other two types of long-term
memory for which emotions have no or little influence. Furthermore,
episodic memory allows one to consciously relive an experience and the
associated sensations and related affects.

Interactions between episodic and semantic memory

23There is the possibility that old memories are replaced by new ones.
The duration of storage would then be influenced by the storage capacity
in this case, but this is not proven. 22

On the other hand, the author mentions the fact that episodic and
semantic memories are dependent on each other and work together. Indeed,
through her experiences, the individual will acquire semantic knowledge
by associating words with these experiences. This semantic knowledge can
be acquired by generalizing certain properties shared by an element.
“This generalization process involves what is called induction, a form
of reasoning that the human mind relies heavily on.This process of
induction allows the human mind to create semantic categories, based on
a mechanism for generalizing properties” (Habib et al., 2018). This
allows us to save cognitive resources. As for episodic memory, it also
calls upon semantic memory to make sense of the events experienced.
“This [semantic] knowledge makes it possible to qualify the memory, to
give it substance, and to make it intelligible” (Habib et al., 2018).

Joseph Stordeur refers to episodic memory during learning. He explains
that it is possible to remind the learner of a real-life situation in
order to help him solve a problem. The learner will then draw on his
episodic memory (in association with semantic memory) in order to
transpose what he has already learned during a previous task (Stordeur,
2014). Moreover, Pascale Toscani explains that episodic memory cannot be
called upon before the acquisition of language because, for this, the
individual must be able to “evoke his memories with language” (Toscani
et al., 2017). This would be corroborated by “infantile amnesia”
(individuals would have very few memories dating before the age of 5
years).

Figure 5 represents a synthesis of the interactions between the
different memories according to the MNESIS model. It is described in
detail by Olivier Houdé. To begin with, he explains that working memory,
at the center of this model, “includes components specific to the
processing of verbal material (the phonological loop), visual-spatial
(visual-spatial register), multimodal (episodic buffer), all coordinated
by the central administrator” (Houdé et al., 2018). These different
elements constituting the working memory are involved in procedural
learning and in the updating of the procedural memory in charge of
storing the constituents of procedural learning (cognitive,
perceptual-verbal, perceptual-motor). The working memory also intervenes
in “the functioning of the memory systems manipulating mental
representations: the perceptive memory, the semantic memory […], and the
episodic memory”. The author specifies that in order to store a memory
in the episodic memory, it is necessary to go through the perceptual and
semantic memories in order to encode the percepts and the meaning.
Furthermore, he explains that “memories can become semantic over time,
particularly via repetition, and become knowledge” (Houdé et al.,
2018)(as with learning, for example). Conversely, “other memories will
remain very vivid, enamelled with numerous perceptual-sensory details
and recalled with a feeling of reviving” (Houdé et al.,

2018).

Figure 5 - The interactions of the different memories. This figure is
taken from the Inter- Systemic NEo- Structural Model (MNESIS) model by
Alan Baddeley. It has been reproduced by various authors and

23

Memorization

in particular by Olivier Houdé (Houdé et al., 2018)

The process of memorization mobilizes different types of memories acting
in a network, and it is interesting to present a synthesis of these
memories with their location, before addressing more precisely their
interactions and the functioning of memorization. Figure 6 summarizes
the main elements discussed above and specifies the brain areas involved
for each of the memory functions.

Figure 6 - Memories and their locations. This figure comes from the B2V
Memory Observatory. It cites the different memories, locates the brain
areas involved and recalls the functions of each.

Jean-Philippe Abgrall (Abgrall, 2012) and Patrick Lemaire (Lemaire &
Didierjean,

2018) cite four stages in the memorization process:

1.  Encoding is the first step. It concerns the transmission of the
    information “by the hippocampus to one or more specialized lobes
    which will process it and make a ‘memory trace’: a nervous circuit
    in the brain” (Abgrall, 2012). The author specifies that the
    precision of the encoding determines the depth of the memory trace.
    The greater the depth, the better the recording of the information.
    Moreover, he mentions that the depth of the memory trace is an
    increasing function of the emotional state 24 and of the motivation
    at the time of encoding. Grzegorz Markowski defines encoding as “the
    processing and elaboration of information to create a true memory of
    it or the processing consisting in establishing associations of
    ideas, images, between various information that will allow , with
    the help of these mental links, to find information”25.

2.  The storage of information takes place in different areas of the
    brain involved in the memorization process depending on the type of
    information. These areas are all

24 to a certain extent because too violent emotional states can also
have the opposite effect. 25https://gerflint.fr/Base/Pologne1/types.pdf
24

connected to and through the hippocampus. A memory is therefore
composed of several elements linked together by the memory traces
created during encoding. The author specifies that by multiplying the
types of information stored (several sensory modalities at the same
time, each of which is stored in the corresponding sensory areas), the
links are also multiplied, which makes it easier to reconstitute the
memory, but not without posing the problem of binding 26 , i.e., the
matching of several pieces of information during the reconstitution of
this distributed representation.

3.  Recall or restitution is a process that can be voluntary or
    involuntary, occurring when a cue involved in the encoding of stored
    information is perceived. “The more a memory is coded, elaborated,
    organized, structured, the easier it will be to retrieve”27.

4.  Forgetting is cited by the author not as a stage of memorization but
    to help understand the stage of recall. He cites four theories
    concerning forgetting: the theory of decline, of motivated
    forgetting, of hindrance and of interference. The first concerns the
    degradation of memory over time by biological processes, by the
    absence of recall, of reactivation of memories, thus causing the
    deterioration of memory traces. The second concerns non-intentional
    mechanisms aimed at forgetting unpleasant memories. This mechanism
    is closely linked to emotions. The third theory concerns information
    that has not been sufficiently encoded (insufficient or incorrect
    cues) or replayed. The last theory refers to memories that cannot be
    recovered because others prevent this recovery process. This is the
    case when a new memory does not allow the updating of an older
    memory. It goes without saying that in reality all these mechanisms
    are likely to intervene.

Figure 7 summarizes this memorization process and resumes these steps.

Figure 7 - Memorization process This figure comes from the book written
by S. Marc Breedlove (Breedlove et al., 2012). It presents the

26Binding is a notion that has no equivalent French term but that can be
defined. According to Violette Hoareau, “binding is a term used to
describe the fact of linking different characteristics or elements in
the same object. For example, if a red color and a square shape are
presented on a screen, these two elements can be simply bound into a
single element: a red square. The term can also define connecting
different events into a single coherent episode” (Hoareau, 2018). In
addition, Franck Burglen differentiates perceptual binding from memory
binding. The previous definition refers to the former and is automatic,
whereas the latter is not automatic and has “a cognitive cost” (Burglen,
2005) that is more or less borne according to the individual’s
characteristics (age or pathology, for example). It consists of the
intention to memorize the association of different information. The
author cites an experiment in which different individuals were asked to
memorize an image grouping together three images.
27https://lecerveau.mcgill.ca/flash/a/a_07/a_07_p/a_07_p_tra/a_07_p_tra.html
25

mechanisms of memorization

Given all these elements concerning memories, it is possible to say that
they are at the center of cognitive functions and consequently of
learning. The different types of memories are mobilized during learning,
to different degrees. This allows us to understand what is at stake in a
problem solving task like CreaCube.

Working memory will be used throughout the task, while episodic,
procedural and semantic memory will be used at certain times. In this
context, the learner will mobilize his semantic memory to understand and
integrate the instruction. This memory can be associated with episodic
memory to obtain a mental representation of what a vehicle is and what
its components are. Procedural memory will also be called upon when
handling the cubes and trial and error.

In addition, in this part, we will discuss language, motor functions,
reasoning and emotions. These cognitive functions are obviously linked
to memories and are involved in the memorization process, so they will
be discussed next.

1.3.4 Reasoning

According to Marianne Habib, “reasoning helps us to understand and
interpret our environment, to make predictions about future events and
behaviors, and ultimately to make decisions” (Habib et al., 2018).
Reasoning enables understanding and control of the environment. The
author cites three types of reasoning: abductive, inductive and
deductive. She also mentions creative reasoning.

Abductive reasoning

According to Marcel Kadosch, analogy is at the origin of abduction, a
term first used by Peirce. He defines analogy as “the foundation of the
possibility of passing from one term to another without negation of one
term by the next. It was defined as an identity of relations, to
distinguish it from resemblance which would be only a relation of
identity” (Kadosch, 2019). He also explains that Bateson (wrongly)
called this type of reasoning “syllogism28 of metaphor” (Kadosch, 2019).
The “syllogism of metaphor” would be an “operation that selects from
different fields the features they have in common” (Kadosch, 2019).

As for Ji Han, he defines analogy as a cognitive process used to
generate inferences and new ideas using prior knowledge and
experience29. He argues that the ability to perceive and use relational
similarity in different contexts are the constituents of analogy.
According to him, the ability to perceive and use relational similarity
in different contexts are the constituents of analogy. He points out
that these constituents are also fundamental to creativity in science
and art30.

28A syllogism is a line of reasoning involving premises (at least two)
and a conclusion. A proposition (premise) relates a subject and a
predicate. However, the term syllogism refers to deductive reasoning
because it uses logic. 29“Analogy is a core cognition process used to
produce inferences as well as new ideas using previous knowledge and
experience” (Han et al., 2018). 30Analogy is described as the ability to
perceive and use relational similarity across different contexts, which
is widely regarded as a fundamental component of creativity in science
and art" (Han et al., 2018) 26

In his work, the author links the use of reasoning by analogy with the
use of ontologies to study creativity. This aspect will allow the
deepening (later in this document) of the notion of ontology which is at
the heart of the work of the AIDE exploratory action.

The work of Ji Han (Han et al., 2018) brings to light the notion of
“proximity” between two “analogous” notions, which is essential to
understand this mechanism of analogy. It seems that we must first
distinguish31 the notion:

-   
-   

semantic similarity (the brain groups together elements that appear
similar, that is to say, sharing a number of both descriptive and
functional properties) which therefore only quantifies the difference
between the two,

that of semantic proximity (the brain groups together the elements which
often appear together, which are close in the same perceptual zone),
between two constituents.

In this second case, there is one more ingredient, the constituents are
implicitly seen as located in an abstract space: the distance between
these two constituents is associated with a shortest path that connects
one to the other, quantifying proximity (Mercier et al., 2021a).

Formally these two notions are related32 , in particular, with the
notion of edit distance, which is defined as the minimal number of
elementary trans-formation operations to move from one element to
another (e.g., changing a value or adding or removing a component)
(Mercier et al., 2021a). The “cost” is therefore defined as a number of
operations that quantifies the proximity and a minimal transformation
path between the two constituents that defines the proximity.

With this spatialized notion, it is then possible to speak of analogy:
two concepts, distant in the absolute, can be considered as analogous,
in two different contexts, if their relative proximity to a reference
constituent of each context is strong.

Christian George quotes Peirce as the author who analyzed abduction:
“abduction is the process of forming an explanatory hypothesis. [It]
infers from facts of one kind facts of another kind” (George, 1997).
This type of reasoning calls for the activation of knowledge present in
memory. This knowledge must be expressed in the form “If A then B” where
A is a factor absent from the premises and B is the target fact. Without
knowledge expressed in this way, the hypotheses will be elaborated from
other knowledge “which can lead to the use of various sub-reasoning
processes, notably by specification or analogy” (George, 1997). After
the activation process, it is the evaluation of the plausibility of the
hypotheses that intervenes in order to identify the one that is the most
probable, given the knowledge mobilized. If the latter do not allow this
identification, then “it is the internal coherence of the story, its
capacity to integrate all the information into a credible sequence,
which becomes the indicator of the plausibility of the cause invoked in
conclusion” (George, 1997).

31see
https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Similarit%C3%A9_s%C3%A9mantique#Similarit%C3%A9_s
%C3%A9mantique_vs._proximit%C3%A9_s%C3%A9mantique 32In the Anglo-Saxon
sense, similarity (beyond semantic similarity) is quantified as
something whose value increases when the distance between the two
elements decreases: see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Similarity 27

Abductive reasoning is also called hypothetical reasoning because the
product of this reasoning is a hypothesis. Indeed, an individual faced
with an event for which he knows one of the possible causes and for
which he favors one cause over another is using abductive reasoning.
Marianne Habib gives the following example: “For example, a doctor
observes that a patient has a cough (= observed event). He knows that a
cold (= possible cause) causes the cough. He concludes that the patient
has a cold (= cold causes cough)” (Habib et al., 2018). However, this is
only a hypothesis (hypothesis of cause and effect), one possible cause
among others that has been favored because it is more likely to have a
cold than lung cancer when the symptom is a cough33. This reasoning
implies the principle of parsimony: “the simplest hypothesis is the most
probable” (Habib et al., 2018). This type of reasoning is used on a
daily basis by an individual and involves a search in memory either
episodic by trying to match the current episode to a previously
experienced one, or semantic by trying to apply inductively, as
discussed later.

Moreover, Simone Morgagni specifies that “affordances emerge during a
global process of abduction” (Morgagni, 2011). She cites Gibson’s
definition according to which an affordance designates “any possibility
of interaction offered to subjects by their environment” (Morgagni,
2011). Lisa Roux joins this definition and completes it (in reference to
the definition of Donald Norman34). According to her, the learner
discovers potentialities in his material environment “in relation to the
general prior knowledge he has” (Roux et al., 2020). The notion of prior
knowledge is fundamental for the concept of affordance because it is
what allows us to detect them. Indeed, without this knowledge the
learner cannot detect affordances. Moreover, the evolution of this
knowledge can also allow the detection of new affordances. Moreover, the
author specifies that affordances “participate in the construction of
memory traces, since they are what allow him [the learner] to discover,
little by little, his material environment and its logic, in order to
know how to use it to solve the problem he is facing” (Roux et al.,
2020). Simone Morgagni adds that “our manipulations and actions can
produce new affordances that were not previously available and that show
us to what extent creating a certain affordance consists in an activity
of imagining its feasibility” (Morgagni, 2011). In this sense,
affordances are subjective since they depend on prior knowledge, on the
cognitive processes involved in their processing, but above all on the
learner’s perception of his environment.

The author explains Norman’s point of view according to which “the power
of affordances is to implicitly show where to go and how to do it. They
simply construct a privileged path for optimizing behavior, without the
subject even needing to be aware of it” (Morgagni, 2011).

Lisa Roux distinguishes two types of affordances: perceptible
affordances and functional affordances. The first ones are “directly
suggested by sensitive information obtained through the discovery of
objects” (Roux et al., 2020). The second are “discovered during the
interaction of an object with others” (Roux et al., 2020).

33 This is what is formalized in Bayes’ theorem used in decision theory:
“Bayes’ theorem aims to calculate the a posteriori probabilities of an
event according to the a priori probabilities of this event. A priori
and a posteriori are understood in relation to the cognizance of an
information”.
http://tecfaetu.unige.ch/staf/staf-h/voisard/staf17/projet/cours/cours_4.pdf
. Here we use our a priori knowledge about the frequency of colds and
lung cancer. 34The potentialities suggested to the learner (affordances)
are dependent on his or her goals, beliefs, acquired knowledge and past
experiences (Norman, 1988). 28

Simone Mogagni refers to Zhang and Patel who originated the theory of
distributed cognition. According to this theory, affordances could be
distinguished into five types: biological (“built on biological
processes”), physical (“built on physical structure”), perceptual
(“built by spatial paths”), cognitive (“built by cultural conventions”)
and mixed (“constituted by a combination of several of the categories
just listed”) (Morgagni, 2011).

Finally, according to Simone Morgagni, “affordances would be […] nothing
else than actions made possible and salient by the cognitive activity
itself and could be conceived as conceivable responses to a practical
action” (Morgagni, 2011).

During the CreaCube task, the learner can find, for example, the
affordance suggested by the “wheel” on one of the cubes in relation to
the “vehicle” concept stored in memory. This leads him, by reasoning, to
put the cube with wheels in contact with the horizontal plane on which
the vehicle must move.

Creative reasoning is a form of abductive reasoning. Marianne Habib
approaches it as the ability to “find creative solutions to problems
that [human beings] face in their environment” (Habib et al., 2018). By
creative solution, she means a novel solution that allows for the
resolution of a problem or a solution that replaces a less suitable one.

According to Joy Paul Guilford’s point of view, creativity is the
capacity of an individual to imagine or build and implement a new
concept, a new object or to discover an original solution to a problem.
This originality is defined in a given context. The author explains that
the creative process (Guilford, 1956) begins with the recognition of a
problem. It is from there that a process of divergence begins. It is
from there that a process of divergence begins. The latter corresponds
to an exploration (from known elements35) of new combinations or
deformations. It ends, by convergence, in a new solution of the problem,
by a mechanism of verification and evaluation of the new proposal.

Creative cognition encompasses the cognitive processes that contribute
“to the production of creative ideas and creative reasoning” (Habib et
al., 2018). It corresponds to a set of competencies, operations, and
methods that lead to new, original, and contextualized ideas. It
requires access to concepts stored in memories in a flexible way in
order to create new associations. These association processes are
automatic and allow for the reorganization of prior knowledge in a new
and useful way. “The more distant these associations are, the more
creative the ideas generated” (Habib et al., 2018). Expertise thus
facilitates this process because the amount of data accumulated in a
domain makes it easier to combine knowledge and thus lead to a new
solution. Given these elements, the following definition of creativity
is given: “Creativity consists, in particular, in calling upon and
bringing together old knowledge in a new way, in order to generate new
properties from the old” (Habib et al., 2018).

Memory thus appears to be essential to creativity but can paradoxically
become a bias to this creative thinking. It is a fixation effect that
intervenes in creative reasoning. This effect is caused, for example, by
spontaneous reactions to everyday objects for which it would be
necessary to “divert” the use. “It refers to a blockage or a hindrance
in the access to a mental activity, an element that blocks the
accomplishment of the creative thought”

35According to Arne Dietrich, creativity ex-nihilo has never been
observed. Four types of creativity are distinguished, all based on
mechanisms (emotional or cognitive and deliberate or spontaneous) of new
combinations and selections of existing elements (Dietrich, 2004). 29

(Habib et al., 2018). The usual representations that are easily
accessible in memory are at the origin of this. This corresponds to
functional rigidity36. However, it is possible to circumvent this
rigidity, this fixation effect.

Certain executive functions37 allow us to bypass this problem of
fixation. Cognitive control and mental flexibility allow us to resist
habitual behaviors that occur spontaneously, thus avoiding the
production of unoriginal responses, which favors the proposal of more
creative alternative solutions.

Moreover, Marianne Habib states that “reasoning by analogy could
contribute to the production of creative ideas” (Habib et al., 2018).
This is because it is based on previous knowledge or experience and
transfers it to a new situation38. The author cites three steps that are
essential to circumvent the fixation effect during a problem-solving
task. “It would involve first resisting fixation, then redefining the
problem, and finally using cues or leads to provoke new ideas” (Habib et
al., 2018). Reasoning by analogy (or abductive reasoning) would allow
for the restructuring of thought “by linking the structure and
attributes of one object or situation (the source) to another object or
situation (the target)” (Habib et al., 2018).

In the context of the CreaCube task, creativity is one of the criteria
observed during problem solving. Indeed, it is observed that certain
automatic responses can occur concerning the manipulation of the cubes,
for example, one automatic response would be to stack them. However, the
creation of a vehicle in the form of a tower inevitably causes balance
problems when moving it, leading to a failed attempt. This is due to the
fact that memory is required to access prior knowledge about the concept
“cube”.

It is quite possible that the study of executive functions, in section
1.3.5, could provide a more precise understanding of how the learner
bypasses the fixation effect in order to solve the task and to what
extent these functions impact creativity.

Inductive reasoning

Like abductive reasoning, inductive reasoning is hypothetical because it
does not lead to a certain conclusion. On the other hand, it is not
based on the same principle. Indeed, “inductive reasoning implies a
generalization from observations or knowledge (when a glass falls on a
hard surface, it breaks; when a plate falls on the same surface, it
breaks; then if a vase falls on a hard surface, it will break)” (Habib
et al., 2018). Understanding and mastering probabilities is necessary in
this type of reasoning: it is very likely that the vase will break but
it is not certain. Inductive reasoning is probabilistic reasoning.

Patrick Lemaire specifies that inductive reasoning always leads to new
information, unlike deductive reasoning. Moreover, the author explains
the functionalist conception of reasoning: “to do inductive reasoning is
to find regularities between events [which] allow us to formulate
predictions about the occurrence of future events and to reduce our
uncertainty about our environment and what is happening in it” (Lemaire
& Didierjean, 2018). This allows for adaptation to the environment.
Regularities can take different forms: “a rule, a law, a hypothetical,
an equation, a concept or a category” (Lemaire & Didierjean, 2018).

36Functional rigidity occurs when the learner is unable to change the
way he or she uses a habitual object, i.e., to bypass the automatisms of
using that object. 37Executive functions will be presented in section
1.3.5 . 38See the previous paragraph about abductive reasoning. 30

Deductive reasoning

Deductive reasoning is logical reasoning. The conclusions drawn from
this type of reasoning “are necessarily correct if the statements are
true and the inferences 39 are drawn in a rigorous manner” (Habib et
al., 2018). Unlike the previous types of reasoning, this one does not
require the creation of new information but a reorganization of the
information already present. “In sum, inferences are a way of
reformulating information that was already present in an implicit way”
(Habib et al., 2018).

In addition, Patrick Lemaire differentiates two theories concerning
deductive reasoning: the theory of mental models and that of mental
logic. He specifies that these two theories are completely different
even if “they share the common postulate according to which the
performance of subjects on different tasks of deductive reasoning can be
explained by the implementation of common and general processes”
(Lemaire & Didierjean, 2018).

Three processing steps would be implemented in the reasoning according
to the

theory of mental models:

1.  Comprehension: the knowledge of language and environment are
    mobilized to understand the premises40 which allows to “deconstruct
    […] mental models. These mental models are elements or individuals
    particular to the groups described in the premises and relations
    between these elements” (Lemaire & Didierjean, 2018).

2.  

Inference: the individual briefly describes the elements of the
situation (which may include a step of reformulation of the statement).
This description leads to a first conclusion concerning terms not
related in the premises.

3.  Refutation (or falsification): this step allows the search for
    alternative models that validate or invalidate the conclusion
    established in the previous step. If no alternative model is found
    then the conclusion is considered valid. In the opposite case, the
    alternative model is studied during a new inference step in order to
    reach a new conclusion which will also go through the refutation
    step until the individual does not find any alternative model.

This theory can lead to two types of error: encoding and inference. An
encoding error would occur during the comprehension stage (“some A’s are
B’s” instead of “all A’s are B’s”, for example). The inference error is
caused by the individual’s difficulty in looking for alternative models
(counterexamples) to the first conclusion established. This difficulty
would be linked to the limit of working memory because certain types of
reasoning consume more resources than others. It would be during these
more resource-intensive reasonings that the search for alternative
models would become more difficult. Moreover, the individual’s cognitive
abilities also play a role in the difficulty of establishing alternative
models.

The theory of mental logic agrees with the point of view cited by
Marianne Habib. It is

based on three postulates:

1.  The cognitive system would possess the fundamental rules of logic.

39“Operation that consists in admitting a proposition because of its
link with a previous proposition held to be true”
https://www.cnrtl.fr/definition/inference 40The premises correspond to
the assertions that allow, through reasoning, to reach a conclusion. 31

2. The triggering and application of these rules constitute the
mechanism of reasoning.

3.  Logical rules that are not available in the cognitive system can be
    derived from the recombination of other rules that are themselves
    available. The reasoning would then be done sequentially by
    activating the rules to be applied.

In this theory, information would first be stored in working memory in
the form of propositions encoded by a comprehension mechanism. The
premises are then represented in an abstract form similar to a logical
rule (if A, then B). The logical rules would then be applied to these
stored pro-positions. However, if the reasoning does not lead to a
direct conclusion based on the logical rules then the answers provided
will be biased or erroneous and approximate.

This theory also implies the possibility of making mistakes. They can
occur during the comprehension stage in connection with a
misrepresentation of the premises, but also during inference in
connection with a misuse of a rule, either erroneous (for example, that
A is necessarily true because A or B is true), or that does not apply
(error in the premises). Moreover, errors can also be of cognitive
origin (errors of inattention or of maintaining information in working
memory, for example).

These two theories diverge because one is “is based on the principles of
logic (mental logic), the other on semantic principles (men-rate
models)” (Lemaire & Didierjean, 2018). The logical rules used for
reasoning under the theory of mental logic are independent of content.
Conversely, mental model theory postulates that “human reasoning takes
place by mentally imagining the situation described in a reasoning
problem and trying to consider alternative models” (Lemaire &
Didierjean, 2018).

These notions of “logic” and “model” are found in mathematical logic. In
this context, a set of logical propositions can be true, false or
undecidable, at a certain level. It can also have models41 or not. The
purpose of verifying this set of propositions by a model, or models, is
the interpretation of syntactic structures42 in mathematical
structures43 so as to associate them with semantic concepts 44 45.

Logic, rationality and intuition

Marianne Habib warns about the meaning of the word “logic”. She explains
that this term is abused in everyday language to the detriment of
intuition. She specifies that “logic allows us to verify the validity of
an argument, by testing its coherence” (Habib et al., 2018). It is based
on formal rules, themselves “at the basis of all rationality” (Habib et
al., 2018).

Human reasoning is based on logical and probabilistic rules. It is
considered that the more the individual conforms to this framework, the
more rational he is. Michel Métayer defines rationality as “the
characteristic of a thought that links its ideas in a conscious, ordered
and controlled way to reach a determined goal, based on good reasons”
(Métayer,

41Models are objects that verify these logical propositions 42For
example: logical terms, formulas, demonstrations, etc. 43For example:
set of natural integers, groups, universe, etc. 44For example: meaning
or truth. 45More precisely, for the so-called 1st order mathematical
predicates (the most used formalism) there is completeness,
i.e. equivalence between a formula verified in all models and a
syntactically proven formula. 32

2012). The terms of this definition are clarified by Mathieu Gauvin in
a video 46 capsule. For this, he differentiates three types of thoughts:
intuitive thinking, rational thinking and irrational thinking.

Rational thinking involves the establishment of means, which the
individual is able to justify, to achieve a goal. It is controlled and
requires cognitive effort. Conversely, intuitive thinking has no goal or
constraint but is rather dictated by imagination, creativity, emotions
and spontaneity. Intuition does not appeal to reasoning but is closely
linked to Perception. As for irrational thinking, it is observed when an
individual has a goal to achieve but does not give himself the means to
achieve it. It then multiplies decisions that take it away from its goal
or are based on unfounded justifications.

In this sense, it is possible to say that reasoning is motivated by the
achievement of a goal. During a problem-solving task like CreaCube, the
learner sets up a number of means that he is able to justify in order to
achieve his goal: to assemble the cubes so that it forms a vehicle. This
aspect therefore refers to reasoning, logic and rational thinking.
However, it is also possible that the other two types of thoughts are
involved. When the learner is in a context of intuitive thinking, he
performs actions which are not motivated by a goal but which could
potentially lead to it being achieved. For example, he could manipulate
the cubes and put them together as he pleases because he feels pleasure
in doing so without even having the purpose of feeling that emotion. In
the context of irrational thinking, the learner knows the goal to be
reached in order to solve the task but “sabotages” the means used to get
there and fails.

Heuristics and reasoning biases

Paradoxically, “human deductive reasoning often does not conform to the
rules of logic” (Habib et al., 2018). Instead, the author states that
individuals tend to use heuristics 47 (simplifications) that would
amplify the influence of beliefs or superficial aspects of the problem,
at the expense of “algorithms48 corresponding to logic or mathematical
and probabilistic rules, to solve reasoning problems” (Habib et al.,
2018). Therefore, heuristics can be seen as reasoning biases. Jonathan
Evans explains that a reasoning bias “occurs when the majority of people
(more than 50%) fail to give the correct answer to a logic problem and
provide the same incorrect answer. These biases thus consist of
massively irrational conduct in the adult in the area of reasoning”
(Evans, 2011).

There are two types of processing that can explain the occurrence of
cognitive biases. The first is reminiscent of the intuitive thinking
presented above. It allows for the processing of “a large amount of
information independently of working memory load and cognitive
capacities” (Habib et al., 2018). The answer resulting from this
processing may appear to be correct without having an explanation. The
individual is then unable to explain the process that led him to give
this answer. Conversely, the second type of processing involves
algorithms, slower processes requiring efforts involving rational
thought. This second type of processing can also be mobilized as a relay
for the first type. Moreover, these two types of processing can also
come into conflict, leading the learner to provide an erroneous answer
to the problem posed. This conflict occurs when an erroneous intuitive

46https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vSjCIsA0on0 47According to Olivier
Houdé, heuristics are “rapid, automated responses that impose a low
cognitive cost and a low working memory load” (Houdé, 2018a).
48Algorithms are “slower, more costly strategies in terms of cognitive
load than heuristics, but they always lead to a good result because they
rely on the rules of deductive logic” (Houdé, 2018a). 33

response is opposed to an analytical logical response. However, it is
possible to detect this conflict even if the heuristic strategy is more
easily favored during processing conflicts (the learner knows that the
outcome of his intuition is opposed to the result of the analytical
strategy but still chooses the fastest answer even if it is wrong). On
the other hand, it is possible to use an inhibition process to discard
the intuitive response in favor of the logical analytical response.

Reasoning and emotions

It was mentioned earlier that emotions can play a role in reasoning.
Marianne Habib explains that indeed emotions can negatively influence
reasoning by acting on cognitive performance, but she also explains that
it is possible to control this and that there can be a beneficial effect
of emotions on reasoning.

The author refers to a study which demonstrated that logical performance
was impacted by an emotionally negative condition, either by the use of
words “semantically emotional (for example: death, suffering or
illness)” (Habib et al., 2018), either by the induced mood (positive or
negative). “This suggests that beyond their referential value (ie, the
word table refers to a piece of furniture which has four legs and is
used to place objects), the emotional value of the contents about which
participants reason influences reasoning” (Habib et al., 2018). She
explains that emotions and stress generally have a negative effect on
cognitive performance and in particular on “alertness, selective
attention or memory” (Habib et al., 2018). This is explained by the
consumption of a large amount of cognitive resources necessary for
processing emotional content. These resources cannot therefore be
dedicated to type 2 reasoning (using algorithms) and this would affect
the rationality of the reasoning. Thus, the learner would favor the use
of heuristics “at the expense of responses based on logic or on
probability” (Habib et al., 2018).

Secondly, Marianne Habib explains that “the negative effect of emotions
on reasoning can diminish, or even be reversed and become positive, in
certain situations” (Habib et al., 2018). One study showed that emotions
relevant to the emotional content being processed promoted logical
reasoning. In this situation, the individuals presented intense
emotional states related to the subject treated, this subject calling
upon events that were significant for these people. The latter reasoned
more efficiently, were less affected by their beliefs because they were
emotionally concerned by the subject at hand. Individuals who were not
concerned showed much less intense emotions but were paradoxically less
efficient than the individuals mentioned above. The emotional states
considered relevant correspond to the person’s experience. Thus, a
person who has participated in a war (for example) will perform better
cognitively on topics referring to it than people not concerned by this
type of subject. “We understand by this that the affective reactions
evoked by the semantic contents of the reasoning problem were consistent
with emotions experienced in the past following personally significant
events” (Habib et al., 2018).

The semantic content, the affective feeling and the associated affective
history thus have a strong impact on reasoning performance. On the other
hand, the concordance between these elements is less true when the
object contents of reasoning are neutral or when the “emotional contents
are not linked to a past experience” (Habib et al., 2018). In this case,
emotions have a deleterious effect on reasoning. It is “the relevance of
affective reactions to the semantics of the contents in the context of
the task and the affective history” (Habib et al., 2018) that
significantly modulates the impact of emotions on the individual’s
intrinsic motivation and ability to reason effectively. 34

From human reasoning to its modeling

In order to model the learner and considering what has been discussed
above, it is essential to be able to model the reasoning. This can be
made possible by the use of artificial intelligence systems that would
allow the automation of reasoning.

Imène Khanfir Kallela devoted her thesis to this subject and explored
the different theories that would allow to achieve this modeling while
taking into account the uncertainty of the information interacting with
the model. “This is why artificial intelligence, because of its concern
for faithful and adequate representations of the real world, has been
led to take an interest in different frameworks for dealing with
uncertainty in information, ranging from probability theory, to even
more recent theories of interest such as those of possibilities,belief
functions, and imprecise probabilities” (Khanfir Kallel, 2019).

These theories will not be detailed here, but they allow us to put
forward elements pointed out by the author, such as the notions of
possibility and necessity present in the “theories of uncertainty” and
which would allow us to manage the in-certainties, imprecisions,
incompleteness, conflicts and ambiguities of the information processed
during the reasoning. In this sense, the author has created a table to
help choose the most suitable theory for dealing with the imperfections
mentioned above. It is presented in figure 8.

The different forms of uncertainty treatment have an important stake in
the representation of knowledge and the formalization of reasoning by
artificial intelligence methods. In order to understand these theories,
it is necessary to proceed to a theoretical and conceptual
clarification, in particular concerning the differences between
imprecision, uncertainty, graduality and granularity. These elements are
cited for information purposes and have been discussed more specifically
by Salem Benferhat, Thierry Denoeux, Didier Dubois and HenriPrade49. It
distinguishes, in particular, the notions of imprecision (for example, a
measurement made to within one millimeter linked to the precision of the
tool) which is a notion relative to the scale of measurement and the use
made of the value, and uncertainty which corresponds more to
unpredictable events in relation to a model (surprising event). The
notion of a random event (whose operation can be known, like a throw of
a dice) is distinguished from that of a partially known event (which may
not be random). Distinguishing these notions at the theoretical level is
important when it is necessary to understand the cognitive processes
that depend on them, while different formalisms allow to formalize them.

49For more information:
https://www.hds.utc.fr/~tdenoeux/dokuwiki/_media/en/publi/book-cepuades-
test.pdf 35

Figure 8 - Guide to the choice of uncertainty theory. This table is
taken from the work of Imène Khanfir Kallel (Khanfir Kallel, 2019). The
author summarizes the reasons for choosing one theory of uncertainty
among others.

The theories cited fit into the principle of modal logic that Nicolas
Szczepanski defines as “a logic to which we have added modifiers, which
we could understand in natural language as adverbs” (Szczepanski, 2012).
The latter are modalities used to modify a proposition by presenting the
stated fact as “necessary, possible or true” (Szczepanski, 2012).
Possibility and necessity are modal operators that can be used for
modeling human reasoning using artificial intelligence systems.

1.3.5 Executive functions

Jean-Philippe Lachaux defines executive functions as “a set of processes
that prevent our behavior from being a simple succession of reflex
reactions to our environment” (Lachaux, 2018). He specifies that it is
thanks to them that the human being is able to envisage the steps to
reach a goal that he has set himself. They allow us to control ourselves
(gestures, emotions…), to control “our own mental life” (Lachaux, 2018),
mainly thanks to the prefrontal cortex. Ève Leleu-Galland explains that
these cognitive processes allow “to intentionally regulate thought and
actions in order to achieve a specific goal” (Leleu-Galland et al.,
2021) and that they “play a key role in fundamental learning, reading,
writing, counting, reasoning and for socio-emotional skills”
(Leleu-Galland et al., 2021).

Marianne Habib (Habib et al., 2018) agrees with Ève Leleu-Galland
(Leleu-Galland et al., 2021) and Olivier Houdé (Houdé et al., 2018) in
citing three functions that make up the executive functions: motor and
cognitive inhibition, mental flexibility (shifting) and updating in
working memory (updating). Ève Leleu-Galland and Olivier Houdé specify
that higher-level executive functions are built on the basis of these:
"planning, problem solving

36

and reasoning" (Houdé et al., 2018; Leleu-Galland et al., 2021).
According to the author, “executive functions are the capacities of the
prefrontal cortex, more precisely of a parieto- frontal circuit, which
control the execution of behaviors, the choice of strategies and
decision making” (Leleu-Galland et al., 2021).

Sandrine Censabella also agrees with these points of view and quotes
other authors who have mentioned other executive functions. She
concludes on this variety by considering that the executive functions
cover “a whole set of processes whose main function is to facilitate the
adaptation of the person to the demands and sudden fluctuations of the
environment and, in particular, to new situations” (Censabella, 2007).

Motor and cognitive inhibition

According to Olivier Houdé, there are three modes of thought in the
brain: “the heuristic system, corresponding to automatic thoughts, the
algorithmic system, that of logical-mathematical thinking, and the
inhibition system, which intervenes when there is a conflict between the
first two systems” (Houdé, 2018b). In the case of a conflict, the
heuristic system is interrupted by the inhibition process in order to
privilege the system of algorithms. In this sense, Ève Leleu-Galland
defines cognitive inhibition as “the process of the brain that allows us
to resist the perceptual and cognitive heuristics that short-circuit
efficient reasoning” (Leleu-Galland et al., 2021). This control function
is intentional and concerns thoughts, behavior and impulses. Marianne
Habib agrees, writing that inhibition “allows for the temporary
suppression of a habitual, dominant, over-learned or automated response”
(Habib et al., 2018).

According to Sandrine Censabella, there are two types of inhibition:
motor and cognitive. They concern motor and cognitive processes
respectively. The first type of inhibition refers to the control of
automatic or predominant motor behaviors. Cognitive inhibition refers to
the control of processed information (automatic, irrelevant or
conflicting information). Olivier Houdé explains that inhibitory control
intervenes at different moments in the processing of information,
whether during its selection or the selection and execution of the
response. It also acts on “different types of information (perceptual,
motor, cognitive, emotional)” (Houdé et al., 2018) and allows attention
to be focused voluntarily and guided by the goal to be achieved.

A repertoire of actions ready to be executed is found within the
cortico-thalamic loops involving the basal ganglia, and the selection of
one of these actions is done precisely by the lifting of one of the
inhibitions, in this case motor (Alexandre, 2021). This is also the case
for cognitive processing.

Sandrine Censabella specifies that “in reality, the two sides of
inhibition [mentioned above] are strongly linked and are not always easy
to distinguish, at least on the theoretical level (for example, is it
the behavior itself, the motor act, or rather the planning and execution
of it on the cognitive level that is inhibited?)” (Censabella, 2007). It
is for this reason that, in her writing, she prefers to consider “not
the type of process but rather the type of response that is inhibited”
(Censabella, 2007). In this sense, Olivier Houdé adds that inhibitory
control acts “on all our behavioral responses as a ‘stop’ signal that
allows our organism to wait before acting, making a decision or giving a
response” (Houdé et al., 2018). It is impulsivity, behaviors, emotions
and actions that are thus controlled by inhibition.

37

Updating in working memory

According to Marianne Habib, updating in working memory “makes it
possible to update the information maintained by ensuring the follow-up
of successive information, the filtering of some of them, the
substitution of information that has become inappropriate by a new one”
(Habib et al., 2018). Olivier Houdé and Ève Leleu-Galland (Leleu-Galland
et al., 2021) agree in explaining that working memory “allows us to
actively maintain information and to manipulate it for a few tens of
seconds in order to achieve a goal defined a priori” (Houdé et al.,
2018).

It is used in problem solving to organize information. It is divided
into two types: verbal working memory and visual-spatial working memory.
One or the other (or even both) is mobilized depending on the type of
information to be processed. It is mainly the prefrontal cortex that is
involved in this process in order to “allocate attentional resources to
the information to be maintained and to manage the potential
interference of information present in the environment” (Houdé et al.,
2018). This process also relies “on brain areas involved in the
perceptual processing of information maintained in working memory”
(Houdé et al., 2018).

Mental flexibility

Sandrine Censabella defines mental flexibility (or cognitive
flexibility) as “the ability to move from one type of information
processing to another in a fluid and rapid manner” (Censabella, 2007).
Marianne Habib agrees with this point of view by writing that mental
flexibility “allows the disengagement from one set of responses or one
type of representations relevant to a given task in order to engage in a
new category of response or representations relevant to another task”
(Habib et al., 2018). Olivier Houdé and Ève Leleu- Galland
(Leleu-Galland et al., 2021) further clarify this by defining cognitive
flexibility as “the ability to adapt to changes in our environment,
whether it is to change strategy, to adopt a different perspective on a
problem, or more generally to seek out alternative ways of reasoning and
thinking” (Houdéet al., 2018).

This flexibility allows adaptation to any situation involving a “change
of rules, problem-solving strategies, or activities” (Houdé et al.,
2018). It calls upon the executive functions of inhibition and working
memory because the strategies involved require storage in working memory
in order to be analyzed. It is at this point that inhibition intervenes
in order to choose the most appropriate response or rather to discard
the one that is less appropriate depending on the situation.

The use of metacognition (discussed in section 1.4) can allow the
learner to improve the effectiveness of his or her executive functions
by monitoring and evaluating their own cognitive functions.

1.3.6 Language and motor skills

Language

It has been previously discussed that language is involved in the
interactions between different memories and participates in memorization
as presented in figure 5 detailed in section 1.3.350 in which the
phonological loop is discussed. This is related to “the mechanisms of
mental representation” (Lieury, 2017) existing in the human being. Alain

50In section 1.3.3, paragraph “Long-term memories”, subparagraph
“Interactions between episodic and semantic memory”. 38

Lieury explains that these mechanisms are not only used for memory but
also for communication. In this sense, he cites different means of
representation even if the main one is phonetic language. Marie-Pascale
Noël specifies that “language has a double function: it allows
inter-individual communication and is part of the cognitive tools
allowing complex and evolved reasoning” (Noël, 2007). Marianne Habib
cites a definition where language is defined as “the capacity, with
which all normally constituted human beings are endowed, to learn and
use one or more verbal sign systems to communicate with their fellow
human beings” (Habib et al., 2018). Jean Piaget evokes that ego-centric
language51 as allowing “the structuring of thought and regulation of
psychic activity” (Habib et al., 2018). Dale Purves adds that language
is “the faculty of associating arbitrary symbols with particular
meanings to express, to ourselves or to others, thoughts or emotions,
whether we are thinking, speaking or writing” (Purves et al., 2015). It
is therefore symbolic, semantic and arbitrary.

It is also structured because it is governed by rules (grammatical,
syntactic …), evolving since these rules develop over time, generator
because “a finite set of symbols is used to create an infinite number of
combinations having a meaning” (Habib et al., 2018) and “composed of
sound units” (Habib et al., 2018) (pronunciation).

Language solicits other cognitive functions such as perception,
attention, memory and emotion. Indeed, memory contains a mental lexicon
which “corresponds to all the knowledge that a speaker has about the
words of his language and which allows him to understand their meaning”
(Habib et al., 2018). This mental lexicon is solicited during the
perception of stimuli in order to recognize and understand the meaning
of the symbol used by soliciting the knowledge stored in memory and thus
lead to a mental representation. This process is not very costly in
terms of attentional resources and can be automated in a more or less
efficient way. As for emotions, it was previously mentioned that they
have an impact on cognitive functions and language is no exception. They
would intervene during the learning of new words, i.e. during the
formation and updating of the mental lexicon. However, very few studies
have been carried out on this subject to evaluate the real effects.
Moreover, language production also involves motor functions.

There are different models that can represent language processing, each
of which has advantages and disadvantages, but “interactive designs
provide a description that is closer to how cognitive systems interact
in reality” (Habib et al., 2018). This approach takes into account the
solicitation of the learner’s knowledge whether it is conceptual or
refers to inference rules.

Motor skills

Motor skills can be studied according to three distinct models:
cognitive, ecological

and dynamic.

Marie-Pascale Noël begins by presenting the cognitive approach based on
information processing. The central nervous system would control motor
skills allowing the selection of a response and the elaboration of a
sequence of commands to be executed in order to allow the movement of
body segments. The selection of the response depends on different
factors: the goal to be reached, the information perceived in the
environment and those relative to the position of the learner in this
environment and also the memorized

51Egocentric language is also called inner language or subvocalization.
39

information. This information is taken into account and the
displacement generated by the selected response causes the perception of
proprioceptive information. The information perceived in return (sensory
feedback) from the response “allows the central nervous system to detect
possible trajectory errors and to correct them by modifying the motor
commands” (Noël, 2007). It is therefore possible to note three stages,
handled by structures of the central nervous system, in this process:
“the selection, programming and controlled execution of the motor
response” (Noël, 2007).

The author goes on to discuss the ecological approach: “the ecological
approach is based on the links, or coupling, between perception and
action and on the notion of affordance” (Noël, 2007), i.e. the
relationship between the properties of the environment and those of the
learner who is in it. In this case, the affordance is at the origin of
the action taken by the learner. The properties perceived in the
environment are thus used by the learner. This use is dependent on the
learner’s “perceptual and motor capacities” (Noël, 2007). Therefore, the
action in response to affordances present in the environment will depend
on the learner and his abilities. It is then possible to obtain
different responses from one learner to another.

Finally, she discusses the dynamic approach (or self-organization),
which considers that motor action does not depend solely on the central
nervous system but that it results from “an interaction between an
organism, complex by definition and therefore unstable, and the
environment” (Noël, 2007). Elise Faugloire specifies at which level the
organism is perceived as a complex system. This complexity is in fact
situated at the biological level which takes into account all the
constituents of the body involved in the motricity: joints, muscles,
cells… Self-organization or coordination52 would then be “the mastery of
the redundant degrees of freedom of the organism in order to make it a
controllable system” (Faugloire, 2007). According to the author, it is
through learning that this control is acquired.

“According to the dynamic approach, coordination is considered as a
problem of self- organization, where the movement produced is not the
direct consequence of an external instruction” (Faugloire, 2007) in
contrast to the cognitive approach according to which the control of
movements is done in a prescriptive way with the central nervous system
at the origin of the motor orders. Here, “the components of the system
cooperate and act in interaction in order to achieve a common goal”
(Faugloire, 2007). It would then be a question of self-regulation of the
effector system: “control is not centralized by a higher authority, it
is distributed among the different constituent elements of the system53”
(Faugloire, 2007). The organism (at the biological and cognitive level),
the environment and the task (in relation to the goals to be reached)
generate constraints that limit the freedoms and therefore the possible
movements. This makes it possible to exclude actions that do not conform
to these constraints and that would therefore not be suitable for
solving the problem.

To make the link between these aspects and the CreaCube task, it is
possible to conclude that language is not directly involved in the
resolution of the task, at least in the common sense given to it. On the
other hand, this cognitive function will be well solicited in the
interpretation and the comprehension of the instruction by calling upon
the mental lexicon and the subvocalization. Thus, the key word “vehicle”
present in the instruction will

52Coordination can be defined as the arrangement of the parts of a whole
for a given purpose, in a mutual ordering" (Faugloire, 2007). 53System
in the sense of the components of the biological organism as well as
those of its environment. 40

call upon this lexicon in interaction with the semantics of the term
allowing the mental representation of what can constitute a vehicle. In
addition, language could also be solicited verbally so that the learner
explains his reasoning and his actions, thus bringing metacognition into
play in the learning task.

Indeed, it can be involved in language if the learner is invited to
verbalize his or her actions, but also and especially in the resolution
of the problem itself. Perception and proprioception then come into play
so that the learner can evaluate the environment and his or her own
position in the environment. This will allow the learner to program,
control and correct the motor actions implemented to manipulate the
cubes and reach the goal set: to make a vehicle that moves alone from
point A to point B.

1.3.7 Emotions

In the previous sections, it was found that emotions are involved in any
cognitive process, to different degrees. It seems then essential to
define and understand what an emotion is, how it works and what it
implies in the body and to what extent it impacts learning.

What is emotion?

Virginie Goutte explains the difficulty of defining emotion. Indeed, she
cites two authors (Kleinginna and Kleinginna, 1981) who have listed no
less than 92 definitions of emotion with little in common (Goutte and
Ergis, 2011). On this basis, the authors have developed their own
definition of emotions. According to them, “emotions are the result of
the interaction of subjective and objective factors, realized by neural
or endocrine systems, which can: a) induce experiences such as feelings
of arousal, pleasure or displeasure; b) generate cognitive processes
such as perceptually pertinent reorientations, evaluations, labeling; c)
activate global physiological adjustments; d) induce behaviors that are,
in most cases, directed toward an adaptive goal” (Kleinginna and
Kleinginna, 1981).

The author also cites another definition that describes emotion as a
“short-lived somatic manifestation whose occurrence is automatic”
(Goutte and Ergis, 2011). She refers to six basic emotions: anger, joy,
disgust, sadness, fear and surprise. She specifies however, that the
emotions are to be distinguished from the feelings. This point of view
is supported by Antonio Damasio who explains that the field of research
would be well advised to make this distinction. According to him, a set
of responses would be triggered in several parts of the brain and sent
to the body or other parts of the brain by neural and humoral pathways.
It is this set of responses that would constitute the emotions. The
emotional state would result from the collection of these emotions thus
provoking bodily and cerebral manifestations54.

Antonio Damasio goes on to explain that this emotional state is at the
origin of mental states: feelings. The bodily changes produced by the
emotional state, signaled to the structures representing the body in the
central nervous system, result in the formation of representations that
constitute part of the mental state. The latter also includes
alterations in

54“The term emotion should be rightfully used to designate a collection
of responses triggered from parts of the brain to the body, and from
parts of the brain to other parts of the brain, using both neural and
humoral routes. The end result of the collection of such responses is an
emotional state, defined by changes within the body-proper, e.g.,
viscera, internal milieu, and within certain sectors of the brain, e.g.,
somatosensory cortices; neuro-transmitter nuclei in brainstem” (Damasio,
1998). 41

cognitive processing caused by signals from brain-brain responses55.

Stephen Marc Breedlove, for his part, identifies four dimensions
constituting the

emotions, including feelings:

1.  Feelings, which are the intimate and subjective expression of
    emotions. The human

being experiences different types of mental states (feelings).

2.  Actions are induced by emotions and can be qualified as “emotional”
    actions. These actions act in reaction to the bodily manifestations
    taking place during emotional states.

3.  Physiological arousal corresponds to bodily manifestations or
    “autonomic somatic responses” (Breedlove et al., 2012) coordinating
    behaviors. “The strength of the emotions we experience correlates
    with our level of physiological arousal” (Breedlove et al., 2012).

4.  Motivation coordinates cognitive and motor responses occurring in
    order to solve specific adaptive problems. “Emotions are also
    motivational programs” (Breedlove et al., 2012).

Unlike Virginie Goutte, Stephen Marc Breedlove identifies not six but
eight fundamental emotions represented in figure 9. These emotions would
be assembled in pairs of antagonists each represented by one facing the
other in the diagram: joy / sadness, affection / loathing, anger / fear,
expectation / surprise. Medium-intensity emotions are considered core
emotions and vary according to their intensity.

55The term feeling should be used to describe the complex mental state
that results from the emotional state. That mental state includes: (a)
the representation of the changes that have just occurred in the
body-proper and are being signaled to body-representing structures in
the central nervous system (or have been implemented entirely in
somatosensory structures via ‘as-if-body- loops’); and it also includes
(b) a number of alterations in cognitive processing that are caused by
signals secondary to brain- to-brain responses, for instance, signals
from neurotransmitter nuclei towards varied sites in telencephalon"
(Damasio, 1998). 42

Figure 9 - Fundamental emotions. This figure is taken from the work by
Stephen MarcBreedlove (Breedlove et al., 2012) to schematically present
fundamental emotions according to their level of intensity. They are
classified into antagonistic pairs, at different levels of intensity and
divided into modalities. This model is close to that of Robert Plutchik
who also associates each emotion with a basic animal behavior (for
example, terror which leads to freezing, anger to attack, etc.) which is
discussed in the text.

Stephen Marc Breedlove clarifies that the number of emotions, whether
six or eight, is not formally established. There is no way to count
emotions with certainty. Most researchers, however, rely on the study of
facial expressions unambiguously recognizable by another person. It is
for this reason that he takes the party, like the researchers behind
these studies, to identify eight.

Pascale Toscani also discusses social emotions that “are triggered by
social situations and play an important role in our lives” (Toscani et
al., 2017). The author explains that the intensity and triggers vary
from one individual to another depending on education, family
environment or culture for example. She cites compassion, envy, pride,
embarrassment, shame, jealousy, guilt, contempt and admiration as social
emotions. Even though these emotions are caused by social factors, they
are still unique to the individual and felt in a subjective and internal
way.

Mechanisms of emotion

Jean-Jacques Paillera took up Antonio Damasio’s point of view to explain
the triggering of an emotion. According to him, the perception of an
emotionally competent stimulus56 provokes its representation in the
cerebral areas linked to the sensory organs perceiving the stimulus. He
calls this phenomenon the presentation. Emotion triggering sites are
stimulated by signals. The stimulation is only possible if the
triggering sites correspond to the signals sent. This is what he calls
induction. These sites will then activate, elsewhere, other so-called
execution sites. The cascade of events that follows will become an
emotion" (Pailler, 2004).

Stephen Marc Breedlove presents four theories explaining the mechanism
of

56An ‘emotionally competent stimulus’ (ECS) is detected by a filtering
perceptual apparatus, among the stimuli of the environment, real or
remembered by a given situation. […] The competence of the ECS (its
triggering character) is recognized as such, either innate or acquired"
(Pailler, 2004). 43

emotions. Figure 10 summarizes these conceptions.

The first theory represented in Figure 10.a is a popular theory
according to which “autonomic reactions are caused by emotions”
(Breedlove et al., 2012). The author specifies, however, that “the
relationship between emotion and physiological arousal is much more
subtle than that” (Breedlove et al., 2012).

The second theory presented (Figure 10.b) is that of William James and
Carl G. Lange, according to which emotions are perceptions of somatic
changes, that is to say that emotion is felt when the activation of the
body (by stimuli) is perceived by the individual. This conception was
later discarded because it “did not provide a satisfactory explanation
of emotion [although] this theory contributed to the notion that the
experience of emotion involves a ‘reading’ of the individual’s somatic
state” (Breedlove et al., 2012).

The third theory (figure 10.c) is that of Walter Cannon and Philip Bard.
These physiologists disagreed with the previous theory because “the
experience of emotion likely begins long before somatic changes appear”
(Breedlove et al., 2012), and this would be justified by the slowness of
the latter. According to them, somatic reactions are “alert responses of
an organism to a sudden threat [or event], which produce maximum
activation of the sympathetic system in order to prepare the organism”
(Breedlove et al., 2012) to react. The emotions would then have a
psychobiological function that would allow the individual to face the
environmental variations. In this theory, it would be up to the brain to
decide which emotion in particular constitutes an adequate response to a
stimulus. The cortex would then decide “the most appropriate emotional
response and at the same time activate the autonomic system so that the
body is ready to react in the way the brain considers appropriate”
(Breedlove et al., 2012).

44

Figure 10 - Theories on emotional mechanisms. This figure comes from
Stephen Marc Breedlove’s book (Breedlove et al., 2012) and schematically
presents emotional mechanisms according to four different theories. The
example used is that of a deflagration (“Boom!”).

Stanley Schachte remains at the origin of the last theory (figure 10.d)
quoted by Stephen Marc Breedlove. According to him, "emotional
manifestations result from relatively non-specific perceptions of
physiological arousal, to which is added an interpretation, in real
time, by an internal cognitive system of the social, physical and
psychic situation of an individual’’ (Breedlove et al., 2012. The
emotion is then produced appropriately to the stimulus by a cognitive
intervention. According to Stephen Marc Breedlove, this theory also has
several flaws concerning the fact that physiological arousal would be
non-specific and would only affect the intensity of the perceived
emotion without affecting its quality.

These theories are also cited by Marianne Habib, who adds others such as
dimensional theories or theories of cognitive evaluation (the reference
theories at the present time). In the latter, emotion is defined as a
process and not as a state. The perception and the evaluation of the
situation have a central place in the cognitive evaluation

45

theories, they place the cognition in the center of the emotional
process “since the emotion is the direct result of the cognitive
evaluation” (Habib et al., 2018). The author defines cognitive
evaluation as a process capable of detecting and evaluating “the
importance of the environment for the well-being of the individual. This
notion of well-being is based on concepts such as values, needs, beliefs
or current goals” (Habib et al., 2018). According to these theories,
emotion would be a dynamic and multidimensional process with five
components. Four of them are the same as those defined by Stephen Marc
Breedlove and presented previously. The fifth is “the cognitive
evaluation of objects or situations, which allows the triggering and
differentiation of emotions and takes place at the level of the central
nervous system” (Habib et al., 2018).

Figure 11 - Theory of cognitive evaluation. This figure is inspired by
Marianne Habib’s book and represents the schematization of the place of
emotions in the decision-making process according to cognitive
evaluation theories.

Figure 11 illustrates Marianne Habib’s point and shows that cognitive
evaluation is involved in a situation in order to lead the individual to
make a decision that will lead to an outcome. Emotions have a
predominant place in this model. Indeed, anticipated and felt emotions
influence cognitive evaluation. The latter reciprocally influences the
felt emotions. The decision also has an impact on the emotions felt as
well as the result of the decision. Thus, emotions have a central place
in the decision-making process.

Certain areas of the brain are particularly involved in the mechanisms
described. The amygdala is responsible for the decoding of emotions,
particularly stimuli that threaten the organism. The thalamus and the
hippocampus communicate sensory information to the amygdala, which
allows it to link the perceived stimuli with the appropriate somatic
state. The hippocampus is mainly involved in long-term memory and
therefore in the storage and recall of explicit memories. It stores
emotional experiences, which allows us to learn from these experiences
in order to adapt our behavior when similar situations occur again. The
hypothalamus is involved in the activity of the autonomic nervous system
and is the link with the endocrine system. The cingulate gyrus connects
the two hemispheres of the brain and therefore allows the communication
of information between the different brain regions of the limbic system.
The four areas mentioned here constitute the limbic system, which is
considered “the emotional region of the brain” (Habib et al., 2018).

46

Anna Tcherkasoff and Laurie Mondillon evoke the capacity of
self-regulation of emotions. They explain that “emotional regulation
consists in attenuating, intensifying or maintaining a positive or
negative emotion […]. It refers to the processes, both intrinsic and
extrinsic, that allow us to learn to recognize, explore, evaluate, and
modify an emotional reaction”57. These processes allow us to modify the
duration and/or intensity of one or more emotional components. There are
two main ways to regulate emotions: cognitive reappraisal and
distraction. The first consists of modifying the method of evaluation of
the emotional antecedent in order to alter its emotional significance.
Distraction consists in diverting one’s attention from the emotional
experience to a cognitively demanding task in order to use working
memory resources on the focal activity at the expense of the negative
emotional information. Emotional self-regulation allows the individual
to adapt his social behavior. It would then be a question of “emotional
intelligence”. This would promote social well-being as well as good
health.

Participation of emotions in learning

Slim Masmoudi and Abdelmajid Naceur highlight studies in psychology and
neurobiology that show that emotions can have a positive impact on
cognitive functions and learning. They cite various research studies
that show the importance of emotions in cognitive functioning and their
participation when decision making. The authors identify two distinct
processes constituents of the latter: logical-mathematical intelligence
and emotional intelligence. The first refers to reasoning, logic and
rationality. The second would be rather dependent on “skills dedicated
to the management of intra- and inter-individual emotions” (Masmoudi &
Naceur, 2010) (the capacity for self-regulation). It is the
collaboration of these two forms of intelligence that would favor
decision making, problem solving, language, etc. This is in line with
what was discussed in section 1.3.458 on the fact that “positive”
emotions could promote the effectiveness of reasoning and vice versa for
“negative” emotions. The authors cite six studies that explore the
involvement of emotions in decision making. They also conducted their
own exploratory study.

The analysis of these different studies has shown that emotion is not
“simply a factor that colors our choices, yet more important, emotion is
considered as a specific processing that leaves traces in our cognitive
activities of the decision and shapes our decision-making styles”
(Masmoudi and Naceur, 2010). The ability of the individual to identify,
understand, evaluate and regulate his or her emotions contributes “to
the control of mental processes that can support decision making, the
perception of useful information that promotes the achievement of a
specific goal, the retrieval and regulation of necessary knowledge”
(Masmoudi and Naceur, 2010). The result is that emotion allows to put
forward the most positively marked actions and to inhibit their
antagonists. Emotion also allows to “label” the sub-goals elaborated
during a problem-solving task in a positive or negative way. It is
therefore established that emotions have an impact on cognitive
functions such as reasoning, but the reverse is also true. Indeed, the
self-regulation of emotions calls upon cognitive processes such as
reasoning in order to maintain or inhibit the emotion at stake. Emotions
and cognitive functions interact and collaborate in order to reach
decisions, choices that will allow us to reach the set goal.

The results of these studies have allowed us to understand the role that
emotions play in decision making and by extension in a problem solving
task. It is then possible to

57https://www.lippc2s.fr/wp-content/uploads/2013_Tcherkassof-
Mondillon_Emotion_Chapt_deBoeck.pdf 58Section 1.3.4, paragraph
“Reasoning and emotions”. 47

make the link between these findings and the learning process in
general. Thus, both intra- and inter-personal emotions are involved when
the learner is in a learning situation. Acting on these emotions or
rather accompanying the learner to act on his emotions can allow him to
improve his cognitive performance or at least help him to avoid using
them as an obstacle to learning.

In the context of the CreaCube task, there is no interaction with a
teacher to accompany him in this sense. However, this does not mean that
the learner’s emotions do not come into play. This activity does not
initially aim to analyze the learner’s emotions. However, taking this
aspect into account and observing the learner’s bodily reactions (e.g. 
facial) could allow us to identify the points of difficulty or ease of
the learner during the task, for example by detecting boredom or
interest. In order to understand how a learner learns, identifying these
somatic markers during the resolution of the task could allow us to
identify the extent to which it is necessary to take the emotions into
account during a learning situation.

1.3.8 Mental functions: conclusion

The different cognitive functions presented here allow us to conclude
that each of them, at its own level, intervenes in the learning process,
collaborating and interacting with each other to enable the learner to
make the most of a learning situation. It is their consideration,
observation, and analysis that can lead to an understanding of “how the
learner learns”. As mentioned, this is not so simple because these
cognitive functions can equally promote or hinder learning depending on
the internal or external context of the learner, and it is difficult to
measure each of these factors. However, identifying the mechanisms at
stake at each moment of the task can already allow us to learn more
about how learning works and the degree of involvement of cognitive
functions throughout.

1.4 Metacognition

1.4.1 General information

Another aspect of cognition and mental processes is to be taken into
account for learning. Indeed, Jean-Philippe Lachaux explains that
metacognition is crucial for learning and the transferability of
competencies (Lachaux, 2018).

Olivier Houdé precises metacognition as “the set of processes, practices
and knowledge that allow each individual to control and evaluate his or
her own cognitive activities, i.e. to regulate them” (Houdé et al.,
2018). He specifies that cognitive activity consists of “everything we
do when we think” (Houdéet al., 2018).

Jean-Philippe Lachaux mentions metacognitive support during a game, an
experiment or a problem-solving task as being essential in order to
allow the learner to identify the mental processes involved and thus be
able to transfer his or her acquisitions to other situations. Olivier
Houdé confirms this point of view by writing: “just as the teacher
chooses his or her practices, the student chooses (or refuses) to act
cognitively, to respond to the solicitations of attention and effort in
the manner required to accomplish the proposed task” (Houdé et al.,
2018). Thus the elaboration of the task, the task itself, and its
resolution depend on the cognitive and metacognitive investment of the
task designer and the learner attempting to solve it. The author notes
that "it is essential for the teacher as well as for the

48

student to appropriate in a practical and concrete way his part of the
shared cognitive activity, and to understand what conditions its
success" (Houdé et al.,2018).

Furthermore, metacognition is brought into play by the mental functions
in an evaluation process upstream (prediction) and downstream of the
task (evaluation). This is done in relation to the learner’s perception
of the task, but also to the learner’s perception of himself.

In 2004, Margarida Romero studied the role of metacognition in learning,
contextualized in an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS). She cites
several definitions of metacognition related to the previous
information. Metacognition would then be “awareness of the cognitive
experience and acquired knowledge” (Romero, 2004). This awareness would
allow the selection, revision and abandonment of “certain cognitive
tasks, goals or strategies” (Romero, 2004). Furthermore, the author
explores the notions of metacognitive knowledge (knowledge about
cognition59) and metacognitive skills (processes of monitoring, control
and regulation of cognition).

Didier Le Gall and his collaborators agree with the elements previously
discussed by defining the notion of metacognition as referring “to the
knowledge one has of one’s own cognitive processes, their products and
everything related to them” (Le Gall et al., 2009). He specifies that it
refers to “the active monitoring, regulation and orchestration of these
processes in relation to the cognitive objects or data on which they
usually focus in order to satisfy a concrete goal or objective” (Le Gall
et al., 2009). Cognizance is a component of metacognition. It comes into
play during the planning stage, which takes place before the resolution
of the task. It refers to a general knowledge that is not dependent on
the cognitive activity in progress. Conversely, cognizance referring to
a knowledge that depends on this activity comes into play during the
execution of the task and allows the regulation of cognition.

1.4.2 How metacognition works

According to Didier Le Gall (Le Gall et al., 2009), planning and control
are the main functions of cognitive regulation. The first allows for the
development of a plan of action and depends on the learner’s
metacognitive knowledge, while the second allows to evaluate the
effectiveness of this plan during its implementation in the resolution
of the task.

Learning plan is made possible by the implementation of metacognitive
strategies as regulation techniques. These strategies also make it
possible to overcome the difficulties encountered in the revision of
goals and/or sub-goals. “They can either be acquired implicitly, through
successive trial and error, or be explicitly taught” (Houdé et al.,
2018). There are three types of metacognitive strategies: directive
(optimizing the achievement of a cognitive goal), preventive (protection
against illusions and reasoning biases), and motivational (“aiming at
raising awareness of the importance of learning, seeing error
constructively, maintaining a flexible representation of one’s own
intelligence, etc.” (Houdé et al., 2018)).

As for Olivier Houdé, he evokes the terms cognitive activity of control
and evaluation. He specifies however that all is not controlled and
stored in memory. In fact, mental

59on the cognitive processes involved and necessary to solve the task 49

functions and in particular “perception, memory and reasoning have a
receptive dimension” (Houdé et al., 2018). Perception can be exercised
without (the existence of) a specific goal. It is also possible to learn
implicitly (without wanting to, without intending to) and have
uncontrolled memory flashes. Nevertheless, “perception, memory and
reasoning are controlled by a goal of knowing[…] Most of mental life
consists of efforts to identify, recognize, learn, solve problems or
recall knowledge” [Houdé et al., 2018]. Cognitive efforts are modulated
by metacognition according to four dimensions during a prediction or
predictive evaluation stage (first stage of control): “1/ the importance
of the goal, 2/ the intrinsic interest60 of the activity, 3/ the effort
likely to be required to accomplish it, 4/ the probability of achieving
it, given the present circumstances” (Houdé et al., 2018).

Once the control has been completed and the learner is committed to the
task, the monitoring stage follows. A retrospective evaluation of the
action implemented following the planning is necessary to verify the
achievement of the goal or sub-goal. During this evaluation, implicit
predictions (heuristics) allow the comparison between the possible
divergence between the characteristics of the result obtained and those
expected.

As mentioned above, metacognition intervenes upstream of the task by the
prior evaluation of the situation (should we act or not) and then by the
planning. Furthermore, it also intervenes “retrospectively, to inform
the system about the correct execution of the action. In both cases,
prediction or evaluation, what is estimated is the divergence between
the ‘expected feedback’ […] and the ‘observed feedback’ (Houdé et al.,
2018). When the divergence occurs, an error signal is produced
generating an abandonment or a revision of the action. Conversely, if
there is no discrepancy, the learner continues the action or accepts the
result. “The successive cycles of control-monitoring-control are thus at
the basis of all cognitive activity” (Houdé et al., 2018). This
phenomenon is represented in Figure 12.

Figure 12 -Cycles of control-monitoring-control of metacognition over
time. This figure is inspired by the diagram made by Olivier Houdé
[Houdé et al., 2018]. It represents the control- monitoring-control
cycles. Orders correspond to orders given and feedback to progress
observations. The upper level is the active level giving orders while
the lower level corresponds to the subordinate level providing activity
reports.

Moreover, Olivier Houdé explains that affects play an important role in
metacognition. He speaks of noetic feelings, i.e., linked to the
acquisition of knowledge: "It is a feeling of

60Intrinsic interest (or intrinsic motivation) will be defined in
Section 2. 50

difficulty that motivates the decision to deal with the problem or not
and modulates the effort required. It is the feeling of progress that
drives perseverance" (Houdé et al., 2018). The latter are the product of
an automatic brain processing that evaluates “the opportunities to act
cognitively and [adapts] individual cognition to the difficulties
encountered” (Houdé et al., 2018). It is the heuristics (in the sense,
here, of associations between certain parameters of the activity and the
result obtained61) that make this brain processing possible. They make
it possible to use predictive or evaluative cues concerning the success
of the task in hand. Noetic feelings (in the sense defined above and
which allows here a more precise denomination than the term thought62)
of knowing63 or ignoring are provoked by the extent of the discrepancy
between the expected and observed cues. “Several heuristics can be
combined, and give rise to a single noetic feeling that integrates all
the predictive information” (Houdé et al., 2018). One of the heuristics
involved in cognitive feelings is the fluency heuristic64.

The heuristics involved in metacognitive feelings are constructed and
realized without the learner’s knowledge. Cognitive feelings serve as an
interface between implicit automatic processes (the previously mentioned
heuristics) and controlled explicit processes.

The author also links intrinsic motivation60 and attention with
metacognition. He specifies that the learner’s commitment depends on his
intrinsic motivation towards the task. It is the adaptation of this task
to the right extent that will allow the learner to set sub-goals to
achieve the goal of solving the problem at hand. In addition, intrinsic
motivation influences the forms of attention engaged in the task. There
are four types of attentional goals identified by Michelene T. H. Chi
and Ruth Wylie in the ICAP model (Chi & Wylie, 2014):

1.  Passive attention: the learner “merely follows what is said, or at
    least what he understands. Knowledge remains atomic and not
    integrated” (Houdé et al., 2018). It gives rise to metacognitive
    feelings of ease of processing (mastery of a lexicon).

2.  Active attention: the learner “manipulates the content, takes notes,
    rereads” (Houdé et al., 2018). Lexical fluency then becomes
    conceptual fluency. The metacognitive feelings of understanding and
    pleasure of discovery come into play.

3.  Constructive attention: the learner “rephrases the content in his or
    her own words, makes connections between several concepts, etc.”
    (Houdé et al., 2018). Attention is gradually freed from the proposed
    lexicon and the metacognitive feelings at play in the previous level
    intensify.

4.  

Interactive attention: the learner “discusses the material with a peer,
debates with them about the value of the arguments, etc.” (Houdé et al.,
2018). It is centered on communication structured by a knowledge issue
which implies implicit metacognitive evaluations of plausibility,
coherence, relevance and rational justification of what is proposed.

61In this case, these associations are implicitly formed. 62Noetic
feelings are also called “cognitive feelings”. 63“Feeling of knowing”, a
notion introduced by Joseph T. Harten 1965 (Hart, 1965) and cited by
Didier Le Gall (Le Gall et al., 2009) in 2009. 64the speed of a response
predicts the correctness and coherence between the representations
evoked by a question" (Houdé et al., 2018) 51

The learner’s performance is improved between the first and last
attentional forms.

Different forms of control and monitoring of cognitive activity are then
at play.

1.4.3 Metacognition: conclusion

It is then possible to establish the role that the exploitation of
metacognition could play on the resolution of the CreaCube task and more
broadly in game-based learning. Indeed, the learner could verbalize his
progress throughout the problem solving in order to identify the
cognitive processes involved by implementing metacognitive strategies
and thus highlight the prior knowledge or the curiosity justifying the
learner’s actions and progress in the task. Moreover, it would be
possible to understand the strategy implemented by the learner to reach
the goal by verbalizing the sub-goals that he/she has identified as
allowing him/her to reach the solution.

Understanding what the learner mobilizes (“the what”) and implements,
but also how he implements it (“the how”) during a problem-solving task,
could help us learn more about the learning process. As for the learner,
this would allow him to promote his learning. Indeed, by identifying the
processes involved and by justifying his actions and reasoning, he will
be able to transfer his acquisitions more easily to a different task. On
the other hand, as Jean- Philippe Lachaux (Lachaux, 2018) explains, by
multiplying the supports and the forms of tasks while making the most of
metacognition, the learner will find it easier to transfer his or her
knowledge. This will also allow the learner to bring into play a more
efficient attentional form involved in metacognition.

1.5 De la cognition à l’apprentissage humain: conclusion

In the course of this conceptual exploration, the place of cognition in
each of its aspects during learning was highlighted. The
multidisciplinary aspect of this leads to take into account the
diversity and complexity of the interactions at stake in this process.
Information, cognizance, knowledge, cognitive functions, metacognition,
all these elements are constitutive of human learning. Their
implications have been explored and have shown to what extent learning
is a process as complex as it is essential to human development. This
confirms the importance of understanding how this process works.

Some notions have been approached in a transversal way without having
been precisely defined. Motivation, curiosity, intuition, goals, and
digital technologies are among these notions and are at the heart of the
problematic at the origin of this work. Indeed, the FLOWERS project team
has demonstrated that motivation plays a fundamental role in improving
the quality of learning. This team has created algorithms65 that allow
this, to a certain extent. In addition, it was discussed in this first
part that the involvement of different cognitive functions in problem
solving was made possible in part by the goal. More precisely, it is the
existence of an intrinsic or extrinsic goal that motivates the learner
to engage in a task and a fortiori in a learning task. This is at the
heart of the work carried out within the AIDE exploratory action.

Thus, to arrive at a model of the learner and to try to understand how
the learner learns, we must explore these notions. In the light of these
conceptual insights, the learning process and what constitutes it can be
made explicit. This will then lead to the definition of

65See section 3 52

the notions previously mentioned in order to remove ambiguities and to
identify their role in this process. Finally, the study of the work
carried out by the FLOWERS team will allow us to complete the ontology
in charge of representing in a symbolic way the learner who learns
during a problem-solving task.

2 The role of motivation in learning

2.1 Learning process

Jean Frayssinhes and Florent Pasquier describe learning as a “cerebral
reaction to a stimulus, a novelty” (Frayssinhes and Pasquier, 2018).
They also specify that the brain “must be in interaction, […] awake,
motivated, concentrated” and that it “arouses emotions that are linked
to memory” (Frayssinhes and Pasquier, 2018).

Alain Lieury defines learning as “the systematic modification of
behavior in response to exercise” (Lieury, 2017). There are various
levels of learning that would be related to “the complexity of the
nervous system, particularly the brain” (Lieury, 2017).

In this sense, it seems obvious that different factors can influence the
learning process. The cognitive aspects involved and necessary for this
process have been detailed previously. In addition, several theories
have been developed over the years in order to clarify the mechanisms
involved and their evolution over time and the progress made in this
field. These theories will therefore be presented here and will allow us
to clarify the concepts that have not been clarified until now.

2.1.1 Theories of human learning

According to Mohammed Chekour, the contribution of learning theories and
their evolution allows us to advance in the understanding of the
learning process: “learning theories aim to explain the phenomenon of
knowledge acquisition” (Chekour et al., 2015). He cites five of them
that have succeeded him: behaviorism, cognitivism, constructivism,
socio-constructivism and connectivism. We are talking here about
theories of human learning and not theories that formalize machine
learning: the link between the two fields remains to be built.

Behaviorism

Behaviorism is also called behavioral learning theory because it focuses
on the study of behavior. Mohammed Chekour explains that this theory “is
a theory of learning that focuses on the study of observable behavior,
without appealing to internal brain mechanisms or mental processes that
are not directly observable” (Chekour et al., 2015).

The psychologist John Watson is at the origin of behaviorism and was
inspired by the

physiologist Ivan Pavlov on conditioning to develop the theory of
“stimulus-response”.

Alain Lieury discusses conditioning and sensory-motor learning as
primitive modes of learning that require tens or even hundreds of
trials. He illustrates this phenomenon with a Pavlovian experiment on
salivation in dogs during the digestive process. The dog salivates
reflexively at the sight or contact of food (unconditional stimulus),
and the experiment

53

consists in associating this unconditional stimulus with a conditional
stimulus, the sound of a metronome. After 30 trials, the dog salivates
as much at the sound of the metronome as at the sight of food. In
humans, the conditional stimulus is found when learning to ride a bike,
type, or drive a car, for example.

Frédéric Alexandre has also studied the Pavlovian theory. He explains
that responses to stimuli are stereotyped and are the consequences of
learned associations (conditioning). These responses are also called
“Pavlovian reflexes”. According to the author, Pavlovian learning allows
for the anticipation of the positive or negative characteristics of an
unconditioned stimulus as soon as the conditional stimulus arrives, thus
preparing the individual for the event that will occur (Alexandre,
2021).

Today, conditioning and sensorimotor learning are re-grouped under the
term implicit memory (Lieury, 2017). More precisely, emotional
conditioning and conditioned reflexes are associative learning linking a
stimulus to an emotional or behavioral response, as in the Pavlovian
framework. Beyond that, procedural memory allows the acquisition of
motor skills (which concerns habits and competencies), possibly complex
(riding a bike is the most often cited example, which once memorized no
longer requires precise recollection for reuse). Moreover, the priming
effect66 is an increase in abilities following prior exposure to
pertinent information.

Mohammed Chekour also quotes Gustav Theodor Fechner concerning the
stimulus- response model. He “compares the individual to a black box, of
which we know nothing about what happens inside, but of which we can
predict certain behaviors since by proposing particular stimuli we
always obtain the same results at the end” (Chekour et al., 2015). The
model from this theory is shown in Figure 13.

Figure 13 - Fechner’s behavioral model. This figure is inspired by the
diagram presented in the article by Mohammed Chekour (Chekour et
al.,2015). It represents Fechner’s behavioral model. The colored arrows
represent the comparisons between the learning individual and what is
scientifically observable according to the behaviorist learning theory.
The gray arrows represent the succession of learning stages.

The author explains that, for behaviorism, learning is considered “a
lasting change in behavior resulting from particular training” (Chekour
et al., 2015). For example, according to Fechner’s model, the stimulus
could correspond to a notion discussed in class and the response would
be the manifestation of an expected behavior showing that the notion is
assimilated as knowledge. This is made possible by repetition, and
positive reinforcement. The observation of unexpected behavior,
suggesting that the learner has not integrated the knowledge from the
transmitted notion, implies the need to repeat the process until the

66https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amor%C3%A7age_(psychologie) 54

expected behavioral response is observed. When the response conforms to
expectations, positive reinforcement comes into play to validate the
integration of knowledge. “In this theory, the learner is a student who
listens, watches, reacts, and tries to reproduce in front of a teacher
who is an emisor of information, of knowledge, which presents,
describes, schematizes, plans and verifies” (Chekou ret al., 2015). This
means that the learner does not really attribute any meaning to the
knowledge thus restored and that he is not aware of the different stages
of his learning.

Mohammed Chekour highlights the ease of application of this theory while
pointing out the fact that it is insufficient to lead to realistic
modeling of learning: “If this theory is adequate in the perspective of
introducing the digital machine67, it seems too poor to last” (Chekour
et al., 2015).

Emmanuel Duplàa identifies two limits to the cognitivist (or what he
calls computationalist) theory: “the first concerns the”Von Newmann
bottleneck" which forces the establishment of sequential rules for the
processing of symbolic information; the second lies in the fact that
symbolic processing is localized and that the loss or malfunctioning of
a part of the symbols or rules of the system causes a malfunctioning of
the whole" (Duplàa & Talaat, 2011).

Cognitivism

Cognitivism, also called rationalism, focuses on ways of thinking and
solving problems. This theory was developed by George Armitage Miller
and Jerome Seymour Bruner at the birth of artificial intelligence. The
cognitivist point of view is to consider that “learning cannot be
limited to a conditioned recording, but rather must be seen as requiring
a complex processing of the information received” (Chekour et al.,
2015). This theory is based on the structure of memory which “involves
the organization of information and the use of strategies to manage this
organization” (Chekour et al., 2015). Knowledge is thus organized
according to its type: declarative, procedural, or conditional.
Consequently, the integration strategies are different since the
different types of knowledge are not represented in the same way in the
memory. According to Mohammed Chekour and according to cognitive
psychology, “declarative knowledge responds to WHAT, procedural
knowledge to HOW and conditional knowledge to WHEN and WHY” (Chekour et
al., 2015).

Frédéric Alexandre explains more precisely what is implied by these
questions and adds the “where”, knowing that the “when” corresponds to a
temporal localization, whereas the “where” is a spatial localization.

According to him, the “what” and the “why” make it possible to connect
the internal body and the external environment68. The “what” question
would be a means of encoding a conditional stimulus (current goal of the
behavior) as well as its emotional impact. The “why” corresponds to the
characteristics of the motivational impact on the body. It is useful for
encoding the impact of unconditional stimuli or the bodily cost of a
response to obtain it. This question helps to identify why the
individual acts (for what purpose) and why he or she is willing to
expend energy (to what level) to do so.

67The author specifies his thought by giving these examples: “The
behaviorist teacher will be inclined to use exercisers, quizzes,
educational games and/or animations when designing and carrying out
distance learning” (Chekour et al., 2015). 68As a reminder, the three
worlds of cognition are represented in Figure 1 55

The author goes on to say that the questions “where” and “how” make the
link between the extended body and the external environment. The “where”
allows us to gather information about the location of an object in the
external environment and this in relation to the body (or to certain
parts of the body). This is what also allows us to orient ourselves in
the environment. Finally, the question “how” refers to the need to learn
how objects can be modified by the action of certain body parts
(Alexandre, 2021).

Cognitivism considers that the learner “is an active
information-processing system, similar to a computer: he perceives
information from the outside world, recognizes it, stores it in memory,
and then retrieves it from his memory when he needs it to understand his
environment or solve problems” (Chekou et al., 2015). It is no longer
just a matter of acquiring observable behaviors, as suggested by
behaviorist theory, but of integrating knowledge as an external reality
into one’s mental schemas. This implies diversity in the learning
process since, according to this theory, individuality is a factor that
influences the way information is processed.

Mohammed Chekour presents, however, a limit to the cognitivist theory
concerning the motivational aspect which must be taken into account in
the realization of the model because it is this aspect that leads the
learner to invest his resources in the learning task.

Constructivism

According to Pierre Cieutat and Sylvain Connac, constructivism or
cognitive construction theory is based on the fact that learning “is not
adding, but transforming an existing internal organization, in view of
an environment that induces appropriation” (Cieutat & Connac, 2017).
Jean Piaget is at the origin of this theory “based on the idea that
knowledge is elaborated by the learner on the basis of a mental
activity” (Kerzil, 2009).

According to Jennifer Kerzil the learner must appropriate knowledge
through exploration as well as through active learning and practice.
Knowledge is then built from experience, the goal is that the learner
creates its own meaning of the situations and problems it encounters.
“The learning process then consists of starting from the action to think
in order to achieve the resolution of the problem encountered” (Kerzil,
2009).

The author explains that operating schemas69 will be mobilized so that
the learner will be able to either “incorporate the perceived
information into his cognitive structure (assimilation), or modify his
cognitive structure in order to incorporate the new elements from the
situation (accommodation)” (Kerzil, 2009). This is represented in Figure
14.

Mohammed Chekour quotes Jean Piaget’s point of view concerning the
definitions of assimilation and accommodation: “assimilation and
accommodation form an indispensable couple for the cognitive activity
whose different balancing processes will be developed in the balancing
of cognitive structures […] Assimilation designates the reintegration of
new external elements into a pre-existing internal structure;
accommodation designates the adaptation of the organism to the external
variations that it fails to assimilate” (Chekour et al., 201).

69Cognitive structures mobilized by a person when faced with a situation
or a problem. 56

Figure 14 - Learning according to constructivism. This figure
represents the four successive stages encountered during learning, from
a constructivist point of view. (1) The learner’s initial equilibrium is
made up of his or her representations, prior knowledge based on
experience. (2) A new situation or a problem to be solved follows which
causes an imbalance. (3) The reconstruction phase is made up of the
assimilation and accommodation processes which allow for the
incorporation of new representations (assimilation) or the modification
of the initial representations by incorporating the new elements
(accommodation). (4) It is when the new knowledge is mastered that a new
and richer state of equilibrium is reached.

The author also quotes Peter Doolittle and lists the eight essential
conditions for

constructivist pedagogy:

1.  Present complex learning situations similar to those encountered in
    everyday life.
2.  Encourage interaction and collaboration among learners.
3.  Explain the meaning of learning to learners.
4.  Learning should be built from what the learner has learned.
5.  Provide ongoing formative assessment.
6.  Make learners accountable for their learning.
7.  Facilitate learning by guiding the learner.
8.  Use different perspectives to present content.

According to the author, constructivism is still an interesting theory
today because it allows learners to be involved in their learning by
preserving their autonomy and allowing them to progress at their own
pace. This is achieved through the use of diversified, collaborative, or
cooperative tools.

Socio-constructivism

As its name suggests, the social constructivist theory is based on the
principles of constructivism, emphasizing the social role of learning, a
model developed by Lev Vygotsky, according to whom learning also
involves social interaction. Mohammed Chekour explains that learning
tasks must be in the learner’s zone of proximal development, i.e., tasks
that are neither too difficult nor too easy, which increases the
effectiveness of learning and helps maintain the learner’s interest in
the task (intrinsic motivation). The particularity of socio-

57

constructivism is to encourage debate (socio-cognitive conflict) by
having learners work in groups. Moreover, the author adds that “in this
model, errors also correspond to a support point for the construction of
new knowledge” (Chekour et al., 2015).

Connectivism

The theory of connectivism was born out of the evolution of learning, or
rather of learning tools. The introduction of new technologies in the
learner’s daily life is also integrated in the educational system.
“Developed by George Siemens and Stephen Downes, connectivism questions
the process of learning in the digital age and in a networked world by
drawing on the limitations of behaviorism, cognitivism, constructivism,
and social constructivism” (Chekour et al., 2015). George Siemens
defines learning as a process taking place in environments and with
changing elements beyond the learner’s total control70. The author
identifies several elements essential to learning according to the
connectivist theory:

1.  The basis for decision making is changing rapidly.
2.  
3.  Knowing how to distinguish important information from unimportant
    information is

“New information is being acquired constantly” (Chekour et al.,2015).

4.  

crucial. “The ability to recognize when new information changes the
landscape based on decisions made yesterday is also critical” (Chekour
et al., 2015).

The development of information and communications technology “has
allowed to introduce new educational potential, approaches and
pedagogical methods more playful, where interactivity plays an important
role, to diversify the tools used and to adapt more to the learning
process of the learner” (Duplàa and Talaat, 2011). In this sense,
Chun-Yen Chang cites serious games and educational cognitive robotics.
These activities have serious advantages because the learner is then an
actor in his learning (he produces) during “situations for which traces
are collected, which can be replayed to see oneself producing and above
all which can be parameterized to be as close as possible to the needs
of the student’s cognitive work, in this relationship between mental
effort to be provided and help to be received in order to progress”
(Chang et al., 2015).

Emmanuel Duplàa explains that connectionism71 allows the “parallel
processing necessary for complex tasks as well as distributed processing
that guarantees immunity in case of a problem in one part of the system”
(Duplàa andTalaat, 2011). This is in contrast to the limitations
encountered in cognitivist theory and is in line with George Siemens’
view of connectivist theory, or learning in a networked world. Emmanuel
Duplàa cites François Guité who characterizes connectivism “as a model
of learning that recognizes the social upheavals caused by new
technologies, which mean that learning is no longer just an
individualistic and internal activity, but it is also a function of the
environment and the communication tools available” (Duplàa and Talaat,
2011).

70This may remind us of what was discussed in section 1.3.4, paragraph
"From human reasoning to its modeling, where it is precisely about how
to model these elements outside the learner’s control. 71Connectionism
would be the discipline at the origin of connectivism. Here, Emmanuel
Duplà referred to its modeling. 58

Figure 15 - 21st Century Skills This image, created by Leslie Dumont as
part of the conference “Should digital technology be integrated into the
school, in fact?” by MargaridaRomero71, is a Venn diagram representing
21st century skills mobilized during educational activities.

In 2020, Margarida Romero and Gérard Giraudon analyzed a video by Derek
Muller with the aim of demystifying the use of digital and new
technologies in the educational system (Romero & Giraudon, 2020). They
recall the fundamental impact of the social process in learning and the
role of the teacher in this process. Therefore, they explain that
computational approaches can be a support, an evolution for education
but not a revolution. Margarida Romero also addresses this in a lecture
in 2018 72. In it, she differentiates the types of digital use in
educational activities. Indeed, learning is promoted when the activity
developed by the teacher mobilizes the skills represented in Figure 15.
Digital technology is then an instrument used by the teacher to build
new learning activities.

In Figure 15, the learner is represented in the center. He acquires,
mobilizes and associates the skills represented by the four colored
circles around him. The following relationships are identified:

● Collaboration + Problem Solving = Collaborative Problem Solving ●
Problem Solving + Computer Thinking = Problem Solving Using Computers ●
Computer Thinking + Creativity = Creative Computer Thinking ● Creativity
+ Collaboration = Co-creativity

These relationships are integrated into a first set of individual
attitudes which is critical thinking represented by a yellow circle in
the diagram. These attitudes are associated with values specific to the
learner as well as with values held by the group. These values and
attitudes are necessary within the learner’s social group and essential
to learning. They create an environment that is conducive to the
development and mobilization of competencies.

72https://pixees.fr/faut-il-integrer-le-numerique-a-lecole-en-fait/ 59

All of these elements are found in the eight principles of connectivism
as seen by

George Siemens and summarized by Mohammed Chekour:

1.  Learning and knowledge lie in the diversity of opinions.
2.  Learning is a process linking specialized nodes or sources of
    information.
3.  Learning can reside in non-human devices.
4.  The ability to know more is more critical than what is currently
    known.
5.  Nurturing and maintaining connections is necessary to facilitate
    continuous learning.
6.  The ability to see connections between domains, ideas, and concepts
    is a basic skill.
7.  Obtaining accurate knowledge with the ability to update it is the
    intent of connectivist-

based learning.

8.  Decision-making is a learning process in itself. The importance one
    gives to information varies over time, depending on changes in the
    environment of that information.

Although the advantages of this theory have been demonstrated, it is not
unanimously accepted in the scientific community. Indeed, Plon
Verhagenne does not consider connectivism to be a theory of learning but
rather a pedagogical trend that “essentially discusses the type of
knowledge that the student must acquire and the skills to be developed
in order to make these acquisitions. The connectivist model focuses more
on the organization of learning and does not indicate anything about how
the student learns, and therefore about the actual process of learning”
(Duplàa and Talaat, 2011).

Emmanuel Duplàa also cites Bill Kerr as a detractor of connectivism. The
latter “does not consider connectivism as a radical change at the
theoretical level. In particular, he thinks that there are already
theories that can be used in the digital age and does not see much
difference between connectivism and the theory of distributed
cognition”73 (Duplàa and Talaat, 2011).

Learning theories: conclusion

The different theories presented have successively shed light on and
shown developments concerning the foundations of learning. Each one has
its advantages and limitations.

The CreaCube problem solving task, at the center of this work, does not
belong to

one theory in particular but benefits from several of them.

Indeed, this task mobilizes, among other things, the learner’s
sensory-motor skills. During the problem solving process, the learner is
filmed so that it is possible to observe his or her behavior in relation
to the learning tool used. It is then possible to make the link between
the stimulus-response system of behaviorism and the learner’s action
during the detection of affordances, for example, when the learner
detects the switch and flips it. It is then possible to make the link
between this example and the notion of Pavlovian reflex

73“The hypothesis of distributed cognition was formulated in a
particular context where researchers in cognitive sciences were
preoccupied with the design of computerized artifacts to carry out
collaborative tasks. It has progressively become a research program for
cognitive sciences whose objective is to widen the unit of analysis of
cognitive processes. It is therefore not reduced to an analysis of
interaction situations between a human agent and a computerized tool
because the ambition of the program is to understand how human cognition
works” (Conein, 2004). 60

discussed by Frédéric Alexandre.

Moreover, in this task, the learner is not considered as a black box (as
it is the case in behaviorism), but as a complex and active system that
mobilizes cognitive functions. In particular, the learner uses his
memories to solve the problem using his prior knowledge (for example,
his knowledge of the components of a vehicle in order to respond to the
instruction). This refers to the complex information processing found in
cognitivism. Furthermore, the learner is considered according to the
three worlds of cognition, i.e., a body (external environment) that
interacts with the learner’s internal environment and the external
environment, as studied by cognitivist theory.

In the continuity of this and in reference to constructivist theory, the
learner is taken into account as an active complex system whose
cognitive construction allows the mobilization of his prior knowledge as
well as its updating during the problem-solving task. The learner learns
from the situation, from his experimentation and appropriates the
knowledge. He is able to make inferences to arrive at the resolution of
the problem (for example, a vehicle has wheels placed on a horizontal
plane in order to move forward, this cube has wheels, so the wheels of
this cube must be positioned on the horizontal plane). During this task,
the learner can either integrate new knowledge through a process of
assimilation74 or update existing knowledge through a process of
accommodation75.

Finally, the connectivist theory combines with the previous ones to
promote learning, through a robotic object, in a playful way that
mobilizes all the resources of the learner in everything that
constitutes him and his environment. The cubes are a robotic learning
object that encourages the learner’s interest and curiosity and thus his
commitment to solving the learning task. It is the novelty and variety
of the pedagogical tools that allow the learner to transfer his
knowledge to various situations by adapting to what constitutes him as
an individual. Indeed, in the example of the CreaCube task, there is no
single correct solution and learning is not conditional on the success
of the task. Learners can call upon various resources according to their
own knowledge, creativity, etc., to succeed in solving the problem posed
because there are many ways to solve it. Moreover, even a learner who
fails in the task learns by manipulating, by trial and error, by being
curious, etc.

2.1.2 Acquisition methods

The theoretical aspect of the different forms of human learning comes
from the

learning theories previously explained. They lead to the study of
methods of acquisition

The objective here is to briefly complete the previous development by
explaining concretely what happens during learning, from the point of
view of the learner’s experience and the observables that can be
measured, without repeating the previous elements, while drawing a
parallel with machine learning.

Jean-François Richard writes in the preface to Anh Nguyen-Xuan’s book
(Nguyen-

74Assimilation: the learner does not know what a switch is, he learns
that the system turns on or off when he operates it. He then integrates
a new knowledge concerning the switch object, by assimilation.
75Accommodation: the learner knows that a switch is used to turn on a
light, he learns that the switch allows the vehicle to be started. The
learner then proceeds to an accommodation, an update of his knowledge on
the switch object. 61

Xuan, 2021) that there are different modes of acquisition of human
learning that would be at the origin of cognitive skills. He cites four
of them:

1.  The first is problem solving. It consists in “learning guided by the
    search for a goal that one strives to reach” (Nguyen-Xuan, 2021).
    The CreaCube task being a problem-solving task, this acquisition
    method is particularly interesting to analyze76. Machine learning
    that is closest to this method is the one acting by reinforcement.
    The agent is put in a situation and makes decisions according to its
    current state. It learns through a trial-and-error mechanism,
    through experience. As the decision- making process progresses, the
    environment sends feedback to the agent in the form of “reward” or
    “punishment”. This influences the rest of the decision-making
    process, in order to improve it.

2.  The second method allows the learning of rules, intentionally or
    not, from examples. This makes it possible to study how the learner
    learns without intending to learn or, on the contrary, to study the
    development of discovery strategies. The learner loses control of
    the learning situation, whereas his or her actions can change the
    situation in the first method . From the information thus obtained,
    he then discovers the constraints and learns how to succeed in the
    task. In machine learning, it is possible to link this method to
    supervised learning. The latter makes it possible to arrive at a
    response predicted by the machine when faced with input data
    compared to examples. This comparison allows the adjustment of the
    parameters in order to progressively reduce the error.

3.  The third method is centered on the knowledge pre-existing to the
    learning. The learner is thus trained to solve tasks under the same
    conditions. He must then mobilize the knowledge acquired during
    these learning situations to solve a task of the same order but with
    additional conditions. The notion of novelty is pointed out here.
    Moreover, the two previous modes also use pre-existing knowledge,
    whether for problem solving or for learning by example. Unsupervised
    machine learning could correspond to this mode of acquisition in the
    sense that it is based on a priori elements.

4.  The fourth method deals with the notions of intentional and
    unintentional learning. The latter are closely linked in this fourth
    method e (unlike the second mode where they appear separately). It
    is then a question of learning by causal relations (for example,
    relations of cause and effect). The author cites examples of
    physical (top/bottom) and conceptual (same/different) acquisition
    during development. Extensive research concerning machine learning
    by causal inference is conducted in order to model this method of
    acquisition. Philippe Brouillard explains that by “integrating
    principles from the domain of causality [to deep learning models,
    which are purely statistical], it becomes possible to model changes
    incurred when the environment undergoes modifications” (Brouillard,
    2021). He adds that “some of the desired capabilities of artificial
    intelligence (generalizing, developing, and using conceptual models)
    that are not present in current models seem attainable by
    integrating concepts from the domain of causality” (Brouillard,
    2021).

These acquisition methods are mobilized in the CreaCube task in order to
study

76See section 2.1.3 62

human learning. The first method concerning problem-solving is at the
heart of this task. When solving this task, prior knowledge is mobilized
and plays an important role: understanding of the instructions,
accumulated knowledge about the components of a vehicle, etc. This
refers to the third method of acquisition, which is the learning of the
vehicle. This refers to the third mode of acquisition. Finally, the
fourth mode is essential in the context of this task, since it is thanks
to this mode that the learner can adapt to his environment and take into
account the changes that take place when handling the cubes, for
example. Moreover, the examples of causal relations cited previously by
the author are quite representative of what is at stake here: this cube
is below or above that one (physical acquisition), they connect to each
other on this face but not on that one (physical acquisition or even
conceptual acquisition if the link is made with the difference between
the affordances), or this face has wheels which makes it different from
the others (conceptual acquisition), etc.

Related to this, Margarida Romero refers to the Learning Mechanics and
Game Mechanics (LMGM) framework as a way to relate pedagogical
intentions to elements of learner actions77 (Romero et al., 2018).

2.1.3 Problem resolution

According to Patrick Lemaire, “a problem is a situation in which a
person seeks to achieve a goal and does not necessarily have the
procedure to achieve it in memory” (Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018). This
type of situation can be intellectual (for example, problems to be
solved at school) or everyday, collective, or personal (for example,
finding a car or solving a conflict between oneself and another person).

According to the author, two theories are to be considered in
problem-solving: the gestalt approach and the cognitivist approach. The
first “proposes to see the problem- solving activity as a perceptive
activity” (Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018) and implies looking at the
problem from another angle to find the solution. The cognitive approach,
or the so- called information processing approach, “emphasizes the
continuous dimension of the route to a solution and not its suddenness”
(Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018).

Gestalt approach

This approach considers that the objective of problem solving is to
arrive at a Gestalt. The latter “is a form or configuration of the
elements of the situation that is similar to the solution sought. […]
the product of all perceptual and cognitive processes is the formation
of a Gestalt” (Lemaire and Didier-jean, 2018). According to the Gestalt
theory, the mental recombination of the elements of a problem in order
to obtain a stable configuration or Gestalt corresponds to the
resolution of a problem. As this theory is based on the perceptual
aspect of problem solving, it consists of “assembling the parts into a
coherent whole” (Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018).

77Overall, the Learning Mechanics and Game Mechanics (LMGM) model aims
at providing a concise means to relate pedagogy intentions and ludic
elements within a player’s actions and gameplay" (Romero et al., 2018).
63

Figure 16 - The stages of problem solving according to Gestalt theory.
This figure represents the 4 successive stages of problem solving
according to the gestalt theory.

In order to solve a problem, the learner must first recognize the
existence of the problem, i.e., notice a difference between the current
state (or starting state) of the situation and the goal state (or
desired state). The achievement of this goal is conditioned by the
implementation of a certain number of mental operations.

Four steps have been identified by Gestaltists to arrive at the
resolution of a problem.

Figure 16 illustrates these four steps.

1.  Preparation. This stage takes place when the learner acknowledges
    the existence of the problem and the data that constitute it. As
    mentioned above, he/she notices the gap between the starting state
    and the goal state.

2.  

3.  

Incubation. It is during the incubation period that the learner makes
attempts that fail, which leads him to stop his attempts (at least
consciously) to solve the problem and put it aside for a period of time.

Illumination. It occurs after the previous phase. The learner then has
an insight78: “in English, insight means sudden illumination […], the
solution to the problem thus suddenly appears” (Lemaire and Didier-jean,
2018) to the learner.

4.  Verification. This step serves to confirm the insight. The learner
    proceeds to the verification of the insight. This is where the
    correspondence between the solution that suddenly appeared and the
    actual solution to the problem is verified. This allows the learner
    to answer the question: does the solution correspond to the goal
    state set at the beginning?

This approach is similar to a sequence of divergent then convergent
thinking that

structures the mechanism of creativity, detailed above.

Furthermore, Patrick Lemaire explains that this approach has
limitations. The implicit propositions involved in this conception have
no established validity. However, this does not necessarily mean that
there are no unconscious mental processes in problem-solving. From the
point of view of (non-Gestalt) psychologists, problem-solving requires
an elaborate description of the mental operations involved in achieving
the solution of the problem. “Some would add: ‘precise enough that we
can artificially reproduce this chain of operations on a computer and
make the computer do what a human subject does in the same way as the
subject’” (Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018). According to the author, the
gestalt approach would be applicable to a particular category of
problems related to the involvement of the insight. It would then be
unlikely that all problems would be solved by the systematic and
sequential implementation of the previously defined processes. However,
this approach has made it possible to explore the processes involved in
problem-solving. It also has the advantage of being able to be compared
with computational models such as the one

78According to Köhler, the English term insight is derived from the
German term Einsicht. The Office québécois de term “intuition”. it
langue https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insight_(psychologie_cognitive) 64

française relates

the French

to

la

developed by Etienne Koechlin’s team and explained, for example, in
Maël Donoso’s thesis (Donoso, 2013).

The cognitivist approach

The cognitivist approach considers problem-solving as a process of
information processing. According to them, problem-solving concerns
problems with particular characteristics:

● They do not require specific prior knowledge79. ● Their level of
difficulty implies a certain time of resolution as well as certain

reflection80, without the problems being insoluble.

● Their properties can be formalized in the form of a computer
simulation or in a mathematical form, so as to allow a comparison of
performance between the learner and the simulation. “This comparison
often leads to very interesting information about the functioning and
architecture of the human information processing system” (Lemaire and
Didierjean, 2018).

Modeling the learner during a problem-solving task places the learner in
a situation with a goal to be reached without the achievement of this
goal being immediate and obvious. It is a way for the learner to
mobilize, verify and/or consolidate his or her prior knowledge, as well
as to receive new information to acquire new knowledge. Alain Lieury
evokes the transfer of learning in relation to the flexibility of the
brain, thanks to which “a first learning facilitates the second”
(Lieury, 2017). It is thus possible to make the link with the
mobilization of prior knowledge during a learning task such as
problem-solving, for example. This is exactly the problem posed in the
CreaCube study.

Anh Nguyen-Xuan indicates that solving a problem implies understanding,
representing the problem. This induces, at least, the necessity to
describe the starting state and the goal-state (the state reached by the
learner after solving the problem) as well as to describe the means that
can be used to solve the task. The understanding of the problem to be
solved would then constitute “a new knowledge for the person who has
just built a network of relations linking the various data he has
identified” (Nguyen-Xuan, 2021). In other words, the understanding of
the problem and the establishment of a link between the elements that
constitute it are knowledge. However, the author specifies that it
differs from prior knowledge since it does not integrate long-term
memory. Despite this, it may or may not “contribute to reinforcing the
knowledge” [Nguyen-Xuan, 2021] previously mobilized.

Cognitivists distinguish between poorly-defined and well-defined
problems.

“In a poorly-defined problem, the initial and final states of the
problem are sometimes only partially specified” (Lemaire and Didierjean,
2018).The operations required to solve the problem are also not clearly
identified. These problems are then judged as being both the most
interesting and the most difficult to study. Studies conducted on these
types of

79“Problems requiring specific knowledge would be, for example, physics
or mathematics exercises. Problems not requiring specific knowledge are
problems like the Tower of Hanoi or the dehorned chessboard problem”
(Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018). 80“Reflection is the cognitive process
that is engaged when faced with a situation and that remains limited to
the analysis of the latter” (Vacher, 2011). It aims at rationalizing the
perception of a situation. Reflection should not be confused with
reflexivity (“reflexivity encompasses reflection, it is both reflection
on the situation and reflection on reflection” (Vacher, 2011)) or with
reasoning (See section 1.3.4). 65

problems have shown that subjects transform them into well-defined
problems in order to reach resolution. This process consists first of
all in specifying the starting state and the goal state by elaborating
precise sub-problems, and it is the resolution of each of these sub-
problems that would lead to the resolution of the problem. Moreover,
this type of problem solicits both general and specific knowledge. Thus,
a learner who has specific knowledge about the information in the
problem has less difficulty in establishing the sub-problems. As for
general knowledge, it is mobilized when the learner does not have
specific knowledge about certain information of the problem. The
CreaCube task is of this type.

“A well-defined problem is one in which the starting situation [(initial
state)] and the goal to be achieved [(goal state)] are clearly stated”
(Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018). In a well-defined problem, the criteria
derived from the goal to be reached allow the solution to be evaluated.
It is the achievement of the goal that allows us to say that the problem
is solved. By studying the resolution of this type of problem,
researchers wish to identify the sequence of mental operations involved
in the resolution process. Patrick Lemaire cites the “means- ends”
analysis strategy developed by Newell and Simonen 1972 in the General
Problem Solver (GPS) theory. “The means-ends analysis consists in
comparing the present state of the problem and its target state and then
selecting an operator that will reduce the difference” (Lemaire and
Didierjean, 2018). It is a recursive process that involves, on one hand,
the analysis of the difference and on the other, the selection of
operators allowing the reduction of the difference between the starting
state and the goal state until the solution of the problem is obtained.
This strategy assumes two types of skill:

● "the skill to detect the difference between the desired state and the
current state of

the problem" (Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018);

● “the skill to implement an action that will reduce this difference”
(Lemaire and

Didierjean, 2018).

Figure 17 - Stages of problem solving according to the cognitivist
theory. This figure represents the stages of problem solving according
to the cognitivist theory and more precisely the General Problem Solver
theory.

The General Problem Solver theory is a computational theory (it has been
implemented and tested by simulations). It has been designed in such a
way as to allow the resolution of various problems based on very precise
postulates about cognitive processes. It implements four stages of
information processing that lead to the resolution of the problem
posed81. These stages are represented in figure 17 and explained below:

1.  The representation of the problem. It is during this step that the
    problem space is

81This structuring has influenced different cognitive architectures
discussed by Antonio Lieto (Lieto, 2021; Lieto et al., 2018) but will
not be discussed here. 66

constructed. The problem space is composed of the initial state, the
final state of the problem as well as its constraints. It allows the
retrieval of pertinent information in long-term memory (identification
of the similarity between this situation and a previously experienced
situation)82. This space is constructed by the learner and not given to
him/her at the outset with the subject of the problem. It will be
affected by everything the learner knows about the problem and its
resolution.

2.  The selection of the operator. During this step, the learner looks
    for a pertinent operation to perform in order to change the initial
    state of the problem. It is possible that sets of operators are
    already associated in the problem space and some can be selected or
    invented. The smaller the problem space, the easier it is to
    identify the appropriate operators. Conversely, the larger the
    problem space, the more difficult it is to find the operator and the
    more the learners prefer to use heuristics83. The choice of operator
    is conditioned by the level of reduction of the gap between the
    initial state and the goal state (the more the operator reduces the
    difference between the two states, the more adequate it is
    considered to be).

3.  The application of the selected operator. A new state of the problem
    is reached here which may or may not correspond to the goal state,
    and which may or may not be close to it. The goal state can be
    reached with only one operator or can require several.

4.  The evaluation of the problem state. The state reached, by the
    action of the previously selected operator, is evaluated here. The
    current state can correspond to the goal state and the learner
    considers that the problem is solved. Conversely, the current state
    differs from the goal state and the learner resumes the resolution
    process at step 1 (he re-evaluates his representation of the
    problem) or at step 2 (he searches for and selects a new operator).

“The implementation of each of these steps is strongly influenced by
general constraints on human cognition, such as the limits of working
memory or as declarative and procedural knowledge stored in long-term
memory, as well as by certain individual characteristics” [Lemaire and
Didierjean, 2018] of learners.

The General Problem Solver model consists of two essential components in
the problem solving process: the representation of the problem and the
search for the solution.

The first component, the problem representation, has been modeled in the
context of the General Problem Solver theory. The resulting modeling is
called UNDERSTAND. “It is a reading program that extracts the deep
structure (syntactic and semantic) of sentences and builds, from there,
a global description of the problem and its parts” (Lemaire and
Didierjean, 2018).

The second component, the search for the solution, is divided into two
methods:

82We are talking here about analogy: “analogy is a heuristic that looks
for similarities between a problem to be solved and a problem solved in
the past” (Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018). 83“A heuristic is a rule of
unsystematic actions or a general strategy that can lead to an answer
(correct or not) quite quickly” (Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018). 67

algorithms84 85 and heuristics.

Backward search, analogy, and means-ends analysis are examples of
heuristics. The last two (analogy and means-ends analysis) have already
been discussed earlier. The first example, backward search, is limited
to a certain class of problems with a clearly defined goal. This form of
heuristic “starts by identifying the goal to be reached, the initial
state of the problem, and seeks to go from the goal to the initial
state” (Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018) (for example, when the problem to
be solved is a maze). This type of search can also be used to better
identify easy-to-reach sub-goals.

Problem-solving requires creativity, especially when looking for
operators. However, this requires the ability to explore new paths by
breaking out of the classical patterns of thinking. Creativity and thus
problem-solving can be hindered by two obstacles: functional fixedness
and contextual anchoring (also called the Einstellung effect).

Functional fixedness is the inability to assign other functions to an
object than its usual function. As in the candle problem86, it is to be
able to discover other possible functions of an object in a given
context, and therefore other affordances in the sense defined in this
document. When an individual can overcome this limit, they can be more
creative and solve more complicated problems.

Contextual anchoring or the Einstellung effect is a “mental fixation
effect observed in problem solving. To solve a problem, subjects use the
same strategy as the one used for a series of previous problems, even if
the strategy is not the most adapted to solve this particular problem”
(Lemaire and Didierjean, 2018). The learner then finds it difficult to
detach himself from the solution he already knows, whereas another, more
creative solution would be more pertinent and effective. This first idea
is fixed, anchored in the context.

From the present state to the goal state

Throughout this work, there has been talk of goal, sub-goal, and goal
state. However, the term goal has not been precisely defined, even if
common sense allows us to understand the elements discussed above. Here,
it seems necessary to give a definition. “A goal is everything that an
individual strives to achieve. […] More specifically, a goal is a
future- focused cognitive representation of a desired end state that
guides behavior” (Reeve, 2017).

As stated earlier, problem solving involves reducing the difference
between the present state and the target state (the goal). This
difference corresponds to a gap, a divergence, an incongruity. This
would have motivational properties that make it possible to remedy this
incongruity by developing an action plan in order to reach the goal
state and thus regain congruity.

The Test-Operate-Test-Exit model represents the cognitive mechanism “by
which plans drive and direct behavior” (Reeve, 2017). The first step
(test) of this model corresponds to an evaluation of the current state
versus the goal state. Incongruence occurs

84“An algorithm is a rule or sequence of actions that, if applied
correctly, necessarily results in a correct answer” (Lemaire and
Didierjean, 2018). 85“The search in the problem space can implement two
algorithms: a random search or a systematic search” (Lemaire and
Didierjean, 2018). 86In Karl Duncker’s candle problem
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candle_problem, an object must be used in
an unconventional way to solve a seemingly insoluble problem. 68

if there is a discrepancy between the two states, which leads to the
development of an action plan (the “operate” stage. It is when the
actions implemented allow to obtain the state of congruity at the next
test that the process stops (step “leave”). Conversely, when the first
test phase does not reveal any discrepancies, there is congruence, which
allows the process to go directly to the “exit” stage without having to
perform any actions.

According to Johnmarshall Reeve, there are two types of gaps: gap
reduction and

gap creation.

The first type is based “on feedback that detects divergence and
underlies action plans and corrective motivation” (Reeve, 2017). This
feedback is in fact feedback from the environment regarding the
learner’s level of performance in terms of the difference between the
current state and the goal state. It is a negative feedback loop that
reduces discrepancies: “a discrepancy occurs, an action is taken, and
the negative feedback (the discrepancy is reduced) ends that action”
(Reeve, 2017).

The second type is based on a proaction system “in which the person
envisions and defines in advance a higher-level future goal” (Reeve,
2017) that does not yet exist in the problem space. In this case, it is
a positive feedback loop: “a discrepancy is created, an action is taken,
and the positive feedback energizes further discrepancy creation”
(Reeve, 2017). This loop expands the divergence.

Divergence or incongruence (or gap) is the basis of the motivation that
generates action, whatever its type. Gap reduction corresponds to
corrective motivation, it is reactive, seeks to overcome the deficiency
and refers to a feedback system. On the other hand, gap creation
corresponds to goal-setting motivation, it is proactive, seeks growth
and refers to a prevention system.

“Corrective motivation activates a decision-making process, in which the
individual considers many ways to reduce the present-ideal mismatch:
change the plan, change the behavior (increase the effort), or leave the
plan altogether” (Reeve, 2017). It is a dynamic and flexible process
that pushes the learner to pursue the most appropriate action.
Corrective motivation is what allows the action plan to be re-evaluated
in order to achieve problem resolution.

Goal setting “generates motivation by focusing [learners’] attention on
the discrepancy (or incongruence) between their present level of
achievement […] and their ideal level of achievement […]. Researchers
refer to this divergence […] as the ‘goal- performance gap’”
(Reeve,2017). This increases performance, especially in a problem-
solving task.

69

Figure 18 - Problem solving based on the General Problem Solver theory
and the Test- Operate-Test-Exit model. This figure takes again figure 17
based on the General Problem Solver theory by adding the elements of the
TOTE (Test-Operate-Test-Exit) or TOTQ in French
(Tester-Operate-Tester-Quitter) model.

Taking into account all these elements, it is possible to establish a
parallel between the General Problem Solver theory and the
Test-Operate-Test-Exit model. For this purpose, figure 17 has been
reworked to try to integrate this new information. Figure 18 is the
result. The steps of the problem solving have been preserved but some
processes have been clarified. Indeed, at the end of the evaluation, the
incongruity (discrepancy between the present state and the goal state)
or the congruity (concordance between the two states) are put forward
and allow to reach a conclusion on the state of the problem: solved or
not solved, goal reached or not reached. The most difficult part is to
identify when the negative and positive feedback intervene. The
“operate” stage of the model could correspond to stage 2 of the theory
behind this figure. From the “problem not solved” state to the return to
step 2, it would be the negative feedback process that would intervene.
Indeed, it refers to the corrective motivation that allows the action
plan to be re-evaluated and therefore new operators to be selected. On
the other hand, in a less obvious way, it would be the positive feedback
that would lead the learner to return to step 1 at the end of the
evaluation. This refers to goal-setting motivation. Indeed, it is during
the representation of the problem that goals are identified. However, in
this type of feedback, each new goal set must be more difficult than the
previous one. If, at the end of the evaluation, the problem is not
solved but the goal state is not different from the previous one, it is
not possible to speak of positive feedback. Moreover, if returning to
Step 1 leads to setting a new goal, it will necessarily be a lower
level87 to make it easier to resolve the problem. Therefore, the
positive feedback could be true for setting new sub-goals leading to the
goal state, provided that this end state has not been set up front88. In
view of this, the model depicted in Figure 18 is not entirely correct.

Regarding the previously mentioned reservations about the positive
feedback process, it was necessary to revise Figure 18. It is in figure
19 that this has been done. It is possible to see the notion of sub-goal
appearing there. In order to reach the goal state (which corresponds to
the resolution of the problem), it will be necessary to identify, during
the representation of the problem, a sub-goal that is easier to reach
than the goal state. The evaluation of the implementation of the plan
establishes whether there is incongruity or congruity. In the first
case, the sub-goal is not achieved. There is then a negative feedback
leading to the revision of the plan through corrective motivation. In
the second case, congruence refers to the achievement of the subgoal.
This achievement can lead to two new states through two new processes.
If the subgoal is reached and there is congruence with

87It will be an intermediate step leading to the goal state. 88That is,
goals should be set so that their difficulty increases with each
positive feedback. 70

the goal state, then the problem is solved. Conversely, it is the
positive feedback process that comes into play leading to a new
representation of the problem with the identification of a new and more
difficult sub-goal. This process involves goal-setting motivation.

Figure 19 - Problem solving based on the General Problem Solver theory
and the Test- Operate-Test-Exit model: improved version. This figure
takes again figure 18 based on the General Problem Solver theory with
the elements of the TOTE (Test-Operate-Test-Exit) or TOTQ model in
French (Tester-Opérer-Tester-Quitter) and by integrating the distinction
between goal and sub -goal.

Problem-solving: conclusion

This part allowed us to establish the theoretical framework of problem
solving by addressing the Gestalt and cognitivist currents. It emerged
that the Gestalt approach was a relative precursor to other research
conducted in this field. However, it is the cognitivist approach that is
the most pertinent to the subject under study. This approach allowed us
to identify and define the notions essential to the understanding of the
problem solving process as well as the importance of goals in this
process.

In the context of the CreaCube problem-solving task, the problem space
is constructed by the learner in order to represent the elements and
means to be used to reach the goal state: to assemble the four cubes to
constitute a vehicle that moves autonomously from point A to point B. It
establishes the sub-goals to be reached to constitute this vehicle. For
example, a vehicle has wheels so the sub-goal is to find wheels. The
plan of action is then to explore, manipulate the cubes to look for and
identify wheels. It can reach this sub- goal and thus arrive by positive
feedback at the setting of a new sub-goal after having proceeded to a
new representation of the problem: for example, a vehicle has an engine,
the sub-goal then consists in finding an engine. Conversely, the learner
may not reach this sub- goal, calling on corrective motivation which
will allow him/her to review and refine his/her plan of action: for
example, taking each cube one by one, exploring each face… Once this
process has been repeated several times, the learner may reach the last
sub-goal which will then correspond to the goal state and lead to the
success of the task.

71

Within this work, and even more so in this part, the notion of
motivation appeared as transversal and essential to solve a
problem-solving task. Here, it was a question of corrective motivation
and goal-setting motivation. The notions of intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation, curiosity and commitment were also mentioned in the previous
sections. They are at the heart of the subject treated here and more
specifically of the subject treated by the FLOWERS team. They will
therefore be discussed in more detail, in particular through the
analysis of the work carried out within the FLOWERS team.

2.2 Motivation

2.2.1 General Information

Alain Lieury explains, in 2020, that different terms in everyday
language are used, more or less indifferently, to talk about motivation
without having the same meaning. He therefore proposes to define
motivation “as the set of biological and psychological mechanisms that
allow the triggering of action, orientation (towards a goal or,
conversely, away from it) and finally intensity and persistence: the
more motivated one is, the greater and more persistent the activity”
(Lieury & Léger, 2020). This makes the link with the different elements
discussed in the previous sections on cognitive processes and the
mechanisms of problem-solving.

The author had already used this definition in another work in 2017
(Lieury, 2017) and in which he differentiated two types of needs: innate
needs or primary needs in connection with biological mechanisms (hunger,
thirst…) and learned needs or motivations qualified as secondary rather
in connection with psychological mechanisms. This second type of needs
would result from learning or at least would become more complex with
learning.

Jean-Philippe Abgrall defines motivation as a dynamic process resulting
from two needs: perceived competence and self-determination. Perceived
competence would be “the representation89 that one has of one’s
cognitive abilities, i.e. metacognition” (Abgrall, 2012).
Self-determination would correspond to the “representation of oneself in
society, in one’s environment” (Abgrall, 2012).

He specifies that emotions play a decisive role in these two types of
representation. “Positive” emotions will favor positive representations
and a fortiori motivation. Conversely, “negative” emotions will be the
source of avoidance strategies (in opposition to motivation) 90. In this
case, “perceptions are generally distorted by the overly important
affective side which takes precedence over the reality of the cognitive
and the negation of the person” (Abgrall, 2012). The representations
that the learner has of himself within his environment as well as those
that he attributes to others91 have an important influence on the
learner’s cognitive

89Catherine Garnier defines the concept of representation as “a mental
phenomenon that corresponds to a more or less conscious, organized and
coherent set of cognitive, affective and value-related elements
concerning a particular object. It includes conceptual elements,
attitudes, values, mental images, connotations, associations, etc. It is
a symbolic universe, culturally determined, where spontaneous theories,
opinions, prejudices, action decisions, etc. are forged” (Garnier and
Sauvé, 1999). 90Emotions, their classification, their level of intensity
as well as their mechanisms were discussed in section 1.3.7. In
particular, their impact on cognitive processes, decision making and
learning in which motivation is involved is discussed. 91What he thinks
others think of him. 72

engagement in the resolution of a learning task.

This commitment will also be a function of “his orientations, his
general choices, his convictions” (Abgrall, 2012) and determines a
positive or negative personal involvement: this is called the conative.

To summarize, according to Jean-Philippe Abgrall, motivation is
influenced by the

conative, the cognitive and the affective functions.

Furthermore, Fabien Fenouillet has studied in detail different theories
of motivation in order to establish precise definitions. He begins by
giving a simplified definition based on behavioral impact: “motivation
is what explains the dynamism of behavior” (Fenouillet, 2016). With this
definition, he returns to the etymological meaning of the word
motivation 92, according to which motivation would explain, justify,
support and make a behavior, an action, a movement persist.

By confronting several theories and definitions with this simplified
definition, the author arrives at a general definition that takes into
account the individuality of motivation: “motivation designates a
hypothetical protean intra-individual force93, which can have multiple
internal and/or external determinants, and which makes it possible to
explain the direction, the triggering, the persistence and the intensity
of the behavior or action” (Fenouillet, 2016).

The author refers to motivation as an “internal force” with various
effects belonging to one of four categories:

● Direction. “Motivation is a force that directs the individual towards
certain goals. Motivated behavior has meaning that can be interpreted or
analyzed in terms of the outcome(s) produced” (Fenouillet, 2016).

● Triggering. “One of the most visible effects of motivation is related
to behavioral change. […] Triggering is therefore not related to a
simple behavioral adjustment, but reveals the presence of a new
motivation” (Fenouillet, 2016).

● Persistence. “Adopting a behavior over time can be explained from a
motivational point of view from the moment that its maintenance requires
the voluntary exercise of a certain force94 95 . […] Explaining
persistence therefore consists in understanding the nature of this will
to make the action or behavior last” (Fenouillet, 2016).

● Intensity: “Intensity is definitely the least ambiguous motivational
effect. The production of an effort is necessarily explained by the
presence of a force. […] An individual can produce an effort with the
objective of appearing motivated …. In this case, the aim is to appear
motivated, regardless of the purpose of the activity considered”
(Fenouillet, 2016).

92From the Latin moveo meaning to move 93Which can take many forms.
94“Volition theories rely on the concept of will95 which is a form of
motivation that explains why the individual maintains his action over
time to achieve one or more goals 95To explain the persistence of
action; self-determination theory believes that the self seeks to
satisfy its basic needs” (Fenouillet, 2016). 73

Fabien Fenouillet explains that even if the effects produced, mentioned
above, allow to partially characterize motivation, they do not allow to
define its nature. “This is a problem made all the more complex by the
fact that many motivational theories rely on conceptualizations in terms
of purpose, interest, desire, need, or curiosity to talk about
motivation” (Fenouillet, 2016). It seems then difficult to establish a
global definition of motivation that would make it possible to explain
its nature without being specific to a particular concept. The author
then proposes to give a theoretical definition that would be based on
the most general categories possible. In particular, he cites the
example of the theory of self-determination, which categorizes
motivation as being either intrinsic or extrinsic. “Motivation assumes
not only that there is a motive for the individual’s behavior but also
that the individual is able to anticipate the effects of that behavior
if he or she decides to act” (Fenouillet, 2016). This definition is part
of an integrative model (represented in figure 20) aiming to “propose a
global classification of motivational theories and is based on
relatively general categories” (Fenouillet, 2016).

The author defined seven conceptual sets grouping the conceptual
categories of

motivation:

1.  Primary motive

. “Primary motives, which aim to explain the origin of motivation from a
psychological point of view, are of two kinds: instincts and needs”
(Fenouillet, 2016). The instinct is what pushes an individual to make an
action directed towards a goal of which he is not conscious. The needs
can be physiological (hunger, thirst, etc.) or psychological (in
connection with the social relations for example).

a.  

2.  Secondary motive

. They are to be differentiated from primary motives because “they do
not try to explain the absolute origin (from the psychological point of
view) of the behavior and they admit that the environment can contain
factors able to be at the origin of the motivation” (Fenouillet, 2016).
This set gathers twelve conceptual categories96: value, goal, interest,
self-esteem, drive (energy, dynamism), dissonance, emotion, curiosity,
intention, personality trait and original motives.

a.  

3.  Prediction

. Prediction is one of the two facets of the goal97. The goal referring
to prediction is in fact the anticipation of the realization of a final
state. The subjective probability of success or failure is based on this
anticipation: the term expectation is used to describe this. This set
comprises four conceptual categories: expectation- value relationship98
, expectation-value distinction99 , control expectation100 and imaginary
prediction101.

96These twelve categories will not be defined here. Some of these
concepts have been discussed and defined in the previous sections and
others will be discussed in more detail later in this work (such as
goal-directed motivation or curiosity). 97The goal can also refer to the
anticipation of the final state. It is then a goal in the sense of a
motive. 98 “Probability that a given level of effort will produce a
certain level of performance. […] The term instrumentality [qualifies] a
second-level expectation that establishes the probability that a level
of performance will produce a given outcome” (Fenouillet, 2016). 99Here,
expectation is used as a synonym for “self-efficacy”. It is defined as
“an individual’s belief in his or her ability to organize and execute
the course of action required to produce desired outcomes” (Fenouillet,
2016). The impact on value is no longer considered in the relationship
between expectation and the probability of an outcome occurring.
100“Outcome expectation is subject to beliefs of control […] This belief
of control specifies the extent to which the self can produce desired
events or prevent undesired events” (Fenouillet, 2016). 101 It is here a
subjective component of the prediction that is considered. It is a
prediction that is not 74

4. Decision-making

. In this set, it is “the selection of an action by the individual among
all possible alternatives” (Fenouillet, 2016) that is presented as one
of the issues of motivation. Volition is here an explanatory variable of
decision making and is associated with motivation to make a choice. This
set includes two conceptual categories: commitment102 and decision103.

5.  Strategy

. This set goes beyond the theoretical aspects treated in the previous
sets. It emphasizes that setting a goal does not allow motivation to
influence performance if the way to achieve it is not identified. “If
the individual does not know the best strategy to implement, motivating
him or her through the assignment of a goal may even be
counterproductive” (Fenouillet, 2016). This set integrates two
conceptual categories: the cognitive strategy104 and the emotional
strategy105.

6.  Behavior

. “The term behavior has a dual meaning: in a narrow sense, it is
primarily referred to the action that the subject performs on a
situation (the reaction to a stimulus in the behaviorist model), in a
broader sense, the term behavior refers to all psychological functions
and processes” (Fenouillet, 2016). To understand motivation, it would be
necessary to understand the intention behind the observable behavior106.
Motivation triggers, directs, increases the intensity and persistence of
behavior.

7.  Result

. The result corresponds to “the outcome of an action or behavior”
(Fenouillet, 2016). When evaluating a result, motivation can be one
factor among others (factor of performance, resignation or well-being).
Other results are “explicable only in relation to a motivational
explanation” (Fenouillet, 2016). Flow (or flux) is a form of result. It
is “an optimal experience arising when skills are neither exceeded nor
underused. […] Flow is conceived as an experience that provides an
intrinsic reward” (Fenouillet, 2016).

These sets are represented by the purple squares in Figure 20. The
relationships

between each of these sets are shown by the different colored arrows.

Self-regulation (in yellow) acts at three levels of motivation: the
secondary motive (that of action), decision making (the means, costs and
benefits of the choice made are

based on objective probabilities but on beliefs derived from past
experiences. 102It is necessary to differentiate the pre-decisional
phase from the post-decisional phases. It is during the first that “the
individual deliberates on the different motivations that push him to
act” (Fenouillet, 2016). During the post-decisional phases “the
individual’s reflection is no longer to know why he acts but how to do
it. In other words, once the individual has taken the decision to engage
in action, he no longer questions the motivation that led him to the
action. He is committed” (Fenouillet, 2016). The notion of persistence
and prolongation in the activity have a central place in the concept of
commitment. 103“The principle of decision […] seems to be based on an
evaluation of costs and benefits that can take multiple forms […]. This
evaluation can be understood as a calculation, which supposes that Man
is a rational being” (Fenouillet, 2016). This is based in particular on
human reasoning. 104“Cognitive strategies are plans, generally explicit
means, that an individual implements to achieve an end” [Fenouillet,
2016]. They are implemented when effort alone is not enough to achieve a
performance. 105Emotional strategies “are plans or means, more or less
explicit to the individual, implemented to manage emotions in general
and anxiety in particular” (Fenouillet, 2016). 106“Measuring student
motivation solely on academic performance, for example, may suggest that
the student is not motivated if performance is not increasing when it
may only be the effect of behavior on performance that is not visible”
(Fenouillet,2016). 75

reconsidered) and at the level of strategies (modification of
strategies to ensure optimal learning or effective stress management).

Satisfaction (in green) is a return of the result to the initial motive:
the individual is

satisfied when the result responds to the motive initially identified.

Orientation (in blue) is the opposite relationship of satisfaction: it
starts from the motives and goes towards the result. This relation
explains the orientation of the behavior (the motive would then orient
the behavior).

Expectation (in gray) goes from the prediction to the result. It
corresponds to the latency between the elaboration of the probabilities
of failure or success and their verification. The evaluation (in orange)
is the feedback allowing to adapt these predictions or to adjust the
behavior. These two relationships have a strong impact on motivation.

Figure 20 - Integrative model of motivation. This figure is inspired by
a diagram made by Fabien Fenouillet (Fenouillet, 2016) and represents
the integrative model of motivation.

Figure 20 is divided into two parts referring to motivation and
volition. These two

parts are in fact two stages of motivation.

The motives and the prediction are part of the purely motivational
stage. Decision- making is a boundary that separates it from the
volitional stage. It is the orientation of the behavior (goal, need,
interest, etc.) that comes into play here. This allows us to understand
what is at the origin (trigger) of this behavior as well as its
intensity.

The second step has its source at the decision-making level. “The
central question, for many volitional models, is to understand what this
will is made of which makes the behavior persist in order to achieve the
result which effectively motivates the individual” (Fenouillet, 2016).

These two notions can be linked to that of desire and intention in
Michael Bratman’s

76

belief-desire-intention model107 to reflect the balance between
spending time deliberating in order to choose a course of action and
investing in carrying it out (Rao, 1995).

On the other hand, like Fabien Fenouillet, Alain Lieury differentiates
intrinsic motivation from extrinsic motivation. The latter could be
related to reinforcement, that is, an individual is more motivated to
complete a task the greater the reward. Conversely, “the intrinsic
motivations (curiosity, manipulation) would only have an interest in the
activity itself” (Lieury and Léger, 2020).

2.2.2 Extrinsic motivation

According to Johnmarshall Reeve, extrinsic motivation “results from
environmental incentives and consequences [internal and/or external.]
[It] comes from a consequence that is separate from the activity itself”
[Reeve, 2017].

Johnmarshall Reeve differentiates three types of needs involved in
extrinsic

motivation:

● Physiological needs. A physiological need is a “biological condition
within the body that synchronizes its brain structures, hormones, and
major organs to regulate bodily well-being and correct bodily imbalances
that may be threats to growth, development, and life” (Reeve, 2017).
Hunger and thirst are physiological needs. Extrinsic motivation then
results from in-citations in the person’s internal environment and
having consequences on that same environment.

● Psychological needs. A psychological need is “an innate psychological
process that underlies the proactive desire to seek interactions with
the environment that promote personal development, social development,
and psychological well-being” (Reeve, 2017). Autonomy is an example of a
psychological need.

● Implicit motives. An implicit motive is “a developmentally acquired
process (socialization) that drives one to seek out and spend time
experiencing events that have been associated with positive emotions
during the person’s socialization history” (Reeve, 2017). Success is an
example of an implicit motive.

In contrast to physiological needs, psychological needs and implicit
motives require interactions with the external environment and involve
the needs for competence and social belonging. It is psychological needs
and implicit motives that are particularly involved in learning tasks
such as problem-solving.

The author cites Baldwin and Baldwin’s 1986 model of operant
conditioning. Operant conditioning is a process by which the learner
learns to function effectively in the environment. That is, “learn and
engage in behaviors that produce attractive consequences […] and also
behaviors that avoid unpleasant consequences” (Reeve, 2017).

107https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belief/T1/textendash%20desire/T1/textendash
%20intention_software_model 77

S : R → C

(1) 

Equation 1 is the conceptualization of behavior according to the operant
conditioning

model where:

● S is the situational signal (or stimulus). ● R is the behavioral
response. ● C is the consequence. ● The colon between S and R "shows
that the situational signal sets the opportunity for

the behavioral response (but does not cause it)" (Reeve, 2017).

● The arrow between R and C shows that it is the behavioral response
that causes the

consequence.

● S : R “explains the motivational scope of incentives. […] Incentives
solicit, encourage, and bribe people to engage in behaviors that they
otherwise would not have undertaken” (Reeve, 2017).

● R → C shows the motivational scope of the consequences.

This model shows that extrinsic motivation is lead by a stimulus
(stimulus driven)

perceived in the environment (internal and/or external).

On the other hand, Alain Lieury uses the theory of self-determination of
Edward Deci et Richard Ryan to differentiate four types of extrinsic
motivation. This theory is not only based on the principle that humans
need self-determination and that this is involved in all forms of
motivation (intrinsic and extrinsic) but also in amotivation, which is
equivalent to the absence of autonomy or to constraint.Moreover,
self-determination would be modulated by the need for perceived
competence as well as by the need for social belonging (notions
discussed in section 2.2.1). All this is summarized in Figure 21.

Figure 21 - Edward Deci and Richard Ryan’s theory of self-
determination. This figure illustrates the theory of self-determination.
It shows that “the different forms of motivation are determined by a
continuum of self-determination” (Lieury, 2017). The latter is modulated
by the need for competence and the need for social belonging.

In this figure, of

feeling

the

78

autonomy (or self-determination) is represented by a large blue arrow
and starts from the lowest level which corresponds to the constraint to
reach the highest level, autonomy. As said previously, amotivation
represents the lowest level, that is to say demotivation: “when the
individual no longer sees any relationship between what he does and the
results of his activity or that this activity makes no sense to him”
(Lieury, 2017). The highest level of autonomy corresponds to intrinsic
motivation (which will be discussed in more detail in section 2.2.3).
Extrinsic motivation is at an intermediate level of self-determination.
The individual is then regulated in different ways by the external
environment.

Extrinsic motivation would then be distinguished in four forms:

● External regulation: "the individual is regulated by external
reinforcements (the

student goes to school by legal obligation)" (Lieury, 2017).

● Introjected regulation: the rules at the origin of this regulation are
no longer external

but internal (the learner does an action for fear of disappointing for
example).

● Identified regulation: the activity carried out by the learner has
value for him and he

knows it, he has identified it.

● Integrated regulation: the activity is not interesting but corresponds
to the learner’s

deepest values (e.g. putting away the chair when leaving the classroom).

All four forms of extrinsic motivation assume the presence of a goal.
This is consistent with what was discussed in the previous sections,
where the goal is a source of extrinsic motivation. However, the model
presented at the beginning of this section shows that extrinsic
motivation can also be driven by stimuli (situational incentives). It is
then possible to identify two main categories of extrinsic motivation:
goal driven and stimulus driven.

The following section will explain the origin and the implications of
intrinsic motivation

on behavior, especially during a learning task.

2.2.3 Intrinsic motivation

Intrinsic motivation is a different mechanism than extrinsic motivation.
It allows for intrinsically rewarding behaviors such as exploration and
curiosity, without necessarily being related to an internal or external
organic stimulus.

According to François Guillemette, “motivation promotes the development
of autonomy when it is intrinsic, that is to say when what pushes the
learner to commit and persevere in his learning is an advantage that he
found in the learning itself (intrinsic) and not in a fallout from the
learning (extrinsic)” (Guillemette, 2004). It is then the object of
learning and / or the act of learning itself that arouses interest. The
author explains that intrinsic motivation (or curiosity) positively
influences learning through its action on cognitive processes: increase
in the intensity of attention, the ability to concentrate, the
efficiency of memory or even courage when making a decision in the face
of an unknown situation. Commitment, participation and persistence in a
learning task are indicators of intrinsic motivation.

79

Stanislas Dehaene writes that curiosity is a force, aroused by new
information, that would encourage the learner to explore. It would be
the manifestation of intrinsic motivation (Dehaene, 2018). He adds that
curiosity directs the learner towards new or surprising but accessible
elements. That is, neither too simple to understand nor too complicated.
The author cites the work of Frederic Kaplan and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer108
on these aspects.

The phenomenon previously mentioned in terms of complexity and
intermediate novelty sought by curiosity is called flow109 or optimal
experience. Philippe Carré cites Csikszentmihalyi who established the
characteristics of flow (Carré and Fenouillet, 2019):

-   
-   
-   
-   
-   
-   

“The task being undertaken is achievable, but challenging and requires a
particular skill.”

“The individual is fully focused on what he or she is doing, without
distraction.”

“The intended target is clear and the current activity provides
immediate feedback.”

“The individual exercises control over his or her actions.”

“Preoccupation with self disappears, but, paradoxically, the sense of
self is enhanced as a result of the optimal experience.”

“The perception of duration is altered.”

On the other hand, Alain Lieury cites experiments that have shown that
intrinsic motivation is diminished by the integration of rewards
(monetary rewards, for example) into the task in the same way as
constraints (supervision, social evaluation, limited time, etc.). That
is, a previously rewarded activity ceases to elicit intrinsic motivation
once it no longer presents a reward, whereas the same activity with no
reward at all continues to elicit curiosity (Lieury, 2017). He also
highlights the impact of the feeling of perceived competence (or
self-esteem) on intrinsic motivation: “this competence component was
added to explain that good results generally reinforce motivation, and
the opposite for poor results” (Lieury and Léger, 2020). The need for
self-determination or free will also impacts intrinsic motivation: the
results of a task would then be improved when the individual is free to
perform the task without supervision, without other constraints, without
reward and with the feeling of being competent in solving the task.

Regarding learning, a negative self-determined feeling (feeling
incompetent) favored by too high a level of difficulty, or constraints
(social judgment, evaluation, etc.) can cause abandonment or resignation
during learning tasks. In this situation, the learner would not be in
the flow. Conversely, the author explains that active pedagogy, that is
to say the involvement of learners in the choice of tasks and in the
means to be implemented to solve them, would make it possible to promote
the feeling of self-determination and intrinsic motivation.

108This work was carried out within the FLOWERS team and will be
discussed in detail in section 3. 109Term behind the name of the FLOWERS
team. 80

2.3 The role of motivation in human learning: conclusion

In section 2, the study of the learning process allowed us to identify
different theories that contribute to the understanding of what learning
is and how it works. Different modes of acquisition were also cited,
including problem-solving, which is used in the Crea-Cube task. It
appears that these theories influence this problem-solving task in
various ways and to varying degrees. In addition, setting subgoals and
identifying the goal state are essential not only for the learner to
solve the task but also to represent and model it.

Moreover, research conducted on motivation (in terms of learning) shows
that it can be of two types: extrinsic or intrinsic. The CreaCube task
integrates these two types of motivation. Indeed, the stimuli sent by
the instruction and by the objects trigger extrinsic motivation with, in
particular, the identification of the goal state by the learner and the
setting of sub-goals that will allow him to reach this final state. On
the other hand, the playfulness and autonomy left to the learner to
solve this task leads to intrinsic motivation acting as a motor for his
exploration and creativity.

As previously mentioned, the FLOWERS team has studied the process of
intrinsic motivation in learning as well as its modeling. The
researchers of this team have not only created algorithms that allow to
promote the engagement of this motivation in educational tasks but also
to lead the learner to remain in a state of flow throughout his learning
so that his curiosity remains mobilized.Their work will thus be studied
in the following section (section 3).

3 Modeling intrinsic motivation in learning

The FLOWERS (FLOWing Epigenetic Robots and Systems) research team110
has, among other things, been interested in the role of intrinsic
motivation in learning. It has sought to develop algorithms that promote
curiosity during learning by using digital applications with an
educational purpose. This is what will be discussed in this section.

Furthermore, the collaboration between this team and the Mnemosyne team
within the AIDE (Artificial Intelligence Devoted to Education)
exploratory action111112, which aims to develop a model of the learner,
will also be discussed here.

To do this, the problem-solving task (CreaCube)113 will allow us to
collect different data in order to arrive at their symbolic
representation in the form of an ontology. This model will take into
account the motivations114 that lead the learner to act in his
environment in order to solve the task and thus try to better understand
the mechanisms that allow the learner to learn.

110The team https://flowers.inria.fr/
111https://www.inria.fr/fr/aide-nouvelle-action-exploratoire-chez-inria
112https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne/en/aide/
113https://creamaker.wordpress.com/ 114Extrinsic motivation driven by
stimuli and/or goals and intrinsic motivation driven by curiosity. 81

3.1 The involvement of curiosity in learning

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer explains that curiosity is a form of intrinsic
motivation115 that is fundamental to making learning more effective. It
makes the learner more active in his or her learning and encourages
spontaneous exploration and memorization. This is made possible by an
intrinsic reward system that is activated when the learner experiences a
gain in information, novelty or complexity. Csikszentmihalya’s theory of
flow116 is very important here, since it is a matter of offering the
learner activities with a level of novelty 117 and intermediate
complexity to encourage curiosity. Novelty would mobilize attentional
resources in such a way as to increase the duration of involvement,
perseverance in the activity.

The theory of learning progress would explain what “an activity with an
intermediate level of complexity” means. This theory proposes to
conceive of the brain as a predictive machine intrinsically motivated to
pursue activities for which the degree of uncertainty decreases as
learning takes place, which would correspond to the process of improving
predictions118. This means that the learner loses interest in the task
if it is too easy or too complicated. In this case the uncertainty
prediction would be either too low to generate learning, or too high
without being able to be reduced (i.e., the activity would be too
difficult to observe a progression in learning)119.

In addition, research conducted in neuroscience and psychology on
curiosity postulates that there would be a unidirectional causal link
between learning and curiosity. Indeed, the brain would be motivated to
find an activity for which the level of novelty and complexity would be
“intermediate” which would generate a state of curiosity allowing the
improvement of learning and memorization120. However, at this stage, the
model shows that learning itself has no impact on the state of curiosity
whereas the theory of learning progress would include a positive
feedback between learning and intrinsic motivation directed by
curiosity.

Figure 22 illustrates this duality. The first point of view addressed
corresponds to Figure 22a, according to which the intrinsic motivation
(first blue rectangle) to seek an intermediate level of novelty and
complexity would lead (orange arrow) to the state of curiosity (second
blue rectangle), which in turn leads to an intrinsic reward (green
arrow) in feed back. The state of curiosity reached promotes learning
and memorization (third blue

) .

115Intrinsic motivation is defined in section 2.2.3. It differs from
extrinsic motivation (defined in section 2.2.2 116The theory of flow was
presented in detail in section 2.2.3. 117That is, the degree of
similarity or distance between the perceived stimulus and the internal
representations present in memory: “approach or avoidance of novelty
would depend on the degree of novelty, ie, the degree of
distance/similarity between the perceived stimuli and existing internal
representations in the brain” (Oudeyer et al., 2016). 118“This
hypothesis proposes that the brain, seen as a predictive machine
constantly trying to anticipate what will happen next, is intrinsically
motivated to pursue activities in which predictions are improving, i.e.,
where uncertainty is decreasing and learning is actually happening”
(Oudeyer et al.,2016). 119“This means that the organism loses interest
in activities that are too easy or too difficult to predict (ie, where
uncertainty is low or where uncertainty is high but not reducible) and
focuses specifically on learnable activities that are just beyond its
current predictive capacities” (Oudeyer et al., 2016).

120“The brain would be motivated to search for (intermediate) novelty or
complexity, and then when finding it would be in a curiosity state that
would foster learning and memory retention” (Oudeyer et al., 2016). 82

rectangle). There is no feedback in this process. This would imply that
learning would not have an impact on curiosity or intrinsic motivation.

(a) Unidirectional causal link between learning and curiosity.

(b) Learning progress theory: causal link with positive feedback.

Figure 22 - Relationship between learning and curiosity. This figure is
made by Pierre-Yves Oudeyer (Oudeyeret al., 2016). Figure 22a is a
representation of the unidirectional causal link between curiosity and
learning according to research conducted in neuroscience and psychology.
Figure 22b represents the same causal link but according to the learning
progress theory that incorporates a positive feedback loop between
learning and the curiosity state.

The theory of learning progress is illustrated in Figure 22b and shows
the same causal relationship except that a positive feedback loop (blue
arrows) allows us to understand that learning and memorization causally
influence the state of curiosity and intrinsic motivation. This
phenomenon would then allow the learner to persevere in the task and
maintain a state of curiosity as long as it generates a progression in
learning (that is to say as long as it presents a level of novelty and
of intermediate complexity adapted to the progress of the learner in his
learning). It is this progression in learning that maintains the state
of curiosity, thus promoting learning itself and memorization. The
feedback loop acting on intrinsic motivation makes it possible to
readjust the predictions according to the errors (differences between
the learning predictions previously made and the learning actually
achieved).

In a context where the learner would have a choice between several
activities, spontaneous active exploration (according to the learning
progress theory) will direct him towards the activity which, according
to his predictions, will allow maximum progress in learning by avoiding
activities judged too easy or too difficult. The learner will persevere
in this activity until there is no more progress in learning. He will
then resume an exploration phase in search of another activity that will
again allow him to achieve maximum progress.

In order to understand precisely what is at stake for the learner and
his environment during this exploration phase, it is necessary to give a
definition of it. According to Jacqueline Gottlieb, exploration is a
process consisting of choosing actions whose purpose

83

is to obtain information. Actions with an exploratory purpose are
different from physical actions. These exploratory actions may, however,
involve physical actions. The difference between these two types of
actions is that physical actions are intended to change the learner’s
external or internal environment, to interact with the learner
physically (e.g., grabbing an object). Exploratory actions do not seek
to impact the environment but aim to gather information about that
environment and change the learner’s epistemic state121.

Furthermore, Frédéric Alexandre [Alexandre, 2021] specifies that the
learner explores in order to obtain new information, but that he can do
so in two ways: either by following a strategy, or randomly (when there
is no other solution). At the same time, the author explains that
exploration can be done by internal simulations (covertly) or by real
actions (overtly). The choice between these two forms of exploration is
made by taking into account the cost that they generate and their
feasibility. Simulation can be less costly and will therefore be
preferred. However, its implementation may be impossible in some cases,
so real actions will be preferred. On the other hand, real actions can
also be less costly from the start, which will rule out the choice of
simulation.

These explanations of the role of exploration in learning, and more
specifically in learning progress, complement the work of Joy Paul
Guilford cited in section 1.3.4 regarding his involvement in creativity,
in section 2.1.1 where Jennifer Kerzil makes the link with
constructivist learning theory, or in section 2.2.3 where François
Guillemette defines intrinsic motivation.

Finally, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer and Jacqueline Gottlieb explain that
computational models based on a mathematical formalism have been
developed to study curiosity-driven reinforcement learning. Some of
these models will be presented in section 3.2.

3.2 Computational models of curiosity

3.2.1 Intelligent Tutoring Systems

Benjamin Clément and his collaborators from the FLOWERS team have been
working on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS)122 and have developed
algorithms that improve learning performance by acting on learner
motivation through the use of digital activities, as observed
experimentally. The author explains that these tutoring systems allow
for a more accessible, more effective education and at the same time
collect objective measures on learning123. They consist of four main
models:

● Cognitive model. It defines the domain of knowledge or the steps to be
taken to

solve problems in a particular domain124.

121“Multiple paradigms have been devoted to the study of exploration and
have used a common definition of this process as the choice of actions
with the goal of obtaining information. Although exploratory actions can
involve physical acts, they are distinct from other motor acts in that
their primary goal is not to exert force on the world, but to alter the
observer’s epistemic state. For instance, when we turn to look at a new
storefront, the goal of the orienting action is not to affect a change
in the external world (as we would, for instance, when we reach for and
grasp an apple). Instead, the goal is to obtain information” (Gottlieb
et al., 2013). 122Literally, “Intelligent Tutoring Systems”.
123Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) have been proposed to make
education more accessible,more effective and simultaneously as a way to
provide useful objective metrics on learning" (Clément et al., 2014a).
124"A cognitive model that defines the domain knowledge or which steps
need to be made to solve 84

● Learner model. It considers how the learner learns, the evolution of
his cognitive

state during particular learning activities125.

● Learning model. It defines the activities to be presented to learners
based, in a

general way, on the cognitive model and the learner model126.

● User interface model. It allows to represent the way interactions with
the learner

take place and how problems are proposed to them127.

The authors aim to create an intelligent tutoring system by working at
the level of the learning model in order to identify the sequence of
activities that would maximize the learner’s average skill level for the
set of skills being worked on. The work focuses on how to select the
activities that would provide the best learning experience based on an
estimate of the learner’s skill level, progression, and knowledge from
the cognitive model and the learner model. The researchers want to offer
each learner the activities that will provide the best learning
progress.

The approach consists in taking into account the activities estimated to
bring the maximum learning gain, this at the execution of the activity
and based on the learner’s results. Three main advantages have been
identified:

● Lower dependence on the cognitive/learner model. The independence of
the learning model (as independent as possible from the
cognitive/learner model128) requires that the intelligent tutoring
system explore and experiment with various activities to estimate their
potential for learning progress for each learner. The experiments should
be sufficiently informative about the student’s current skill level as
well as estimate the effectiveness of each exercise in improving those
skills. This has been called the “exploration/exploitation” trade-off in
machine learning, where new activities must not only be tried to find
out which are the best, but also simultaneously select the best ones for
the learner to actually learn129.

● Effective optimization methods. These methods make no specific
assumptions about how learners learn and only require information about
the estimated learning progress of each activity. The author makes the
assumption that activities that are

problems in a particular domain" (Clémentet al., 2014a). 125“A student
model that considers how students learn, what is the evolution of their
cognitive state depending on particular teaching activities” (Clémentet
al., 2014a). 126“A tutoring model that defines, based on the cognitive
and the student model, what teaching activities to present to students”
(Clémentet al., 2014a). 127“A user interface model that represents how
the interaction with the students occurs and how problems are proposed
to the learners” (Clémentet al., 2014a). 128Both of these models require
too much data on the learner and the activities to be feasible for a
class of students for example. They take into account the
particularities and difficulties of each learner. The analysis of these
particularities must make it possible to identify which activity will
bring the maximum level of learning progress. This implies taking
individual responsibility for each learner. 129“The technical challenge
is that these experiments must be sufficiently informative about the
student’s current competence level and also to estimate the
effectiveness of each exercise to improve those competences (a form of
stealth assessment). This boils down to what has been called the
“exploration/exploitation” trade-off in machine learning, where we have
to simultaneously try new activities to know which ones are the best,
but also select the best ones so that the student actually learns"
(Clément et al., 2014a). 85

estimated to provide a good learning gain over the course of the
activity should be selected more often. He cites the Multi-Armed Bandits
formalism130131.

● More motivating experience. This refers to the zone of proximal
development132 which seeks to foster the emergence of the state of
flow133 in order to enhance learning.

3.2.2 Contextualization of the algorithms

Their work has included the development of two machine learning
algorithms

(specifically, reinforcement learning):

● RiARiT (Right Activity at Right Time134) which explicitly estimates
the learner’s level of various components of competence (Knowledge
Components135 : KC). The algorithm uses these estimates to propose
activities to the learner136.

● ZPDES (Zone of Proximal Development and Empirical Success137) which
uses a

graph and follows the learner’s progress to choose the activities to
propose138.

In both cases, a Pedagogical Activity Space is defined beforehand. It is
a set of activities that the learner can carry out to acquire
competencies or components of competency139.

To design their algorithms, the authors were inspired by a Multi-Armed
Bandit 140141 EXP4 (Exponential Weights for Exploration and
Exploitation142) algorithm. This variant of the Multi-Armed Bandit
algorithm helps to automatically determine, by random draw143, the share

130This formalism will be discussed below. 131“We will rely on methods
that do not make any specific assumptions about how students learn and
only require information about the estimated learning progress of each
activity. We make a simple assumption that activities that are currently
estimated to provide a good learning gain, must be selected more often.
A very efficient and well studied formalism for these kinds of problems
is Multi-Armed Bandits” (Clément et al., 2014a). 132This was discussed
in section 3.1 and corresponds to the intrinsic motivation of the
learner when faced with an activity that is neither too easy nor too
difficult but just beyond his or her capabilities, as presented in the
learning progress theory. 133See section 3.1. 134The right activity at
the right time. 135This notion refers to elementary competences
involving cognizances and know-how, which are called knowledge
components by the authors. It is characterized by the term “composantes
de compétence” in the document in French 136“The first one is RiARiT,
which explicitly estimates the level of the student’s proficiency for
different KCs to base its choice of activities” (Clément, 2018). 137Zone
of proximal development and empirical success. 138“The second is ZPDES,
which uses a “graph” of activities and tracks progress to choose the
next activity; it does not use a student model based on KCs" (Clément,
2018). 139“A pedagogical Activity Space is considered to be a set of
activities that a learner can practice to acquire skills or knowledge
components” (Clément, 2018). 140“Bandit manchot” algorithm is used in
particular to choose the slot machine which will maximize the player’s
winnings according to probabilities. 141Multi-Armed Bandits is a set of
different techniques but based on the same principle. As the details of
these techniques will not be discussed in this work, the term
“Multi-Armed Bandit algorithm” will be used in order to simplify the
discussion. 142Exponential weights for exploration and exploitation.
143The notion of random choice is important in the difference between
exploitation and exploration. Exploration is based more on random choice
than exploitation, which is based more on the use of prior knowledge. 86

of exploitation and exploration at a time t, i.e., whether the player
should continue using a given machine or try others at that time144 145
146.

From the point of view of learning, and in the context studied by the
authors, their algorithms make it possible to propose to the learner a
sequence of activities which has the greatest probability of maximizing
learning progress and consequently of allowing him to preserve the state
of flow147 during the learning session.

Thus, the Multi-Armed Bandit mechanism is used in these algorithms,
except that it is no longer slot machine arms that are recommended but
human learning activities, and this with the help of machine learning
algorithms by reinforcement148. The gain of money is replaced by the
learner’s progress in learning.

To link this to the approach identified in the previous section (3.2.1),
it is important to remember that the authors have chosen to favor the
learning model by minimizing as much as possible, in particular, the
dependence on the cognitive/learner models. This implies that no (or
little) information concerning the learner’s skills and particularities
is given as input. At the same time, the information concerning the
activities is also limited. For this, the pedagogical expert (e.g. a
teacher) defines the activity space and, if necessary, some roughly
defined constraints on the pedagogical sequence149.

The ZPDES algorithm respects this principle since it has no a priori
information on the learner’s skills and very little on the problem150.
It uses the zone of proximal development and empirically estimates151
learning progress152.

The RiARiT algorithm, on the other hand, is much more dependent on
cognitive/learner models, since it uses a table of data on expected
levels of competence for each activity parameter, in order to relate the
learner’s competences to the activity parameters. His estimates of
learning progress are directly related to this relationship153.

To go further, and in the hypothesis that these algorithms could
participate in the modeling of the learner during a problem solving task
generating a learning gain, it is possible to establish a link with the
CreaCube task. Indeed, the modeled learner must perform a certain number
of actions to solve the task. Here, the algorithm would not propose an
activity but an action to perform. The notions of exploitation and
exploration remain true in the sense that the learner can explore the
cubes totally at random, explore in a more directed way (implication of
the notion of probability while preserving a part of randomness)

144http://www.math.univ-toulouse.fr/~jlouedec/demoBandits.html
145https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bandit_manchot_(math%C3%A9matiques)
146https://hal.inria.fr/tel-01420663v1/document 147As a reminder:
“theories of intrinsic motivation clearly suggest motivation and
learning improve if exercises are proposed at levels that are only
slightly higher than the current level” (Clément et al., 2015).
148Assigning rewards based on the match between the prediction and the
outcome. 149“Our approaches assume that an instructional expert defines
a set of skills to acquire, a set of potential activities/exercises to
practice and, if necessary, coarse constraints on the pedagogical
sequence” (Clément et al., 2015). 150See section 3.2.3. 151Estimates are
based on observation of the learner’s success or failure in previous
activities. 152“Our first approach uses very little knowledge about the
problem and is inspired by the zone of proximal development and the
empirical estimation of learning progress hence the name “Zone of
Proximal Development and Empirical Success” (ZPDES)" (Clément et al.,
2015). 153“Our second approach further assumes the existence of a simple
relation between the activities and the skills. Then, at any given point
in time, the system estimates the learning progress obtained for each
activity by the student. The system then proposes to the student the
activities which provide a higher learning progress, hence the name of
the algorithm : the “Right Activity at the Right Time”(RiARiT)" (Clément
et al., 2015). 87

or exploit the acquired competencies and/or cognizances. This can be
further clarified with the study of algorithms in the next section
(3.2.3).

3.2.3 Presentation of algorithms

The efficiency of the algorithms depends on several elements. First of
all, an expert (or several) must define the activity space in which the
learner will evolve. Then, since these algorithms are based on a
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) type algorithm, it is necessary to understand
the main principles before being able to study them more precisely.

Activity space

Each activity in the activity space is characterized by parameters
(e.g. type of activity) that can take different values (e.g. type A or
type B). These parameters and their respective values define all the
possible activities that can be instantiated within this space154. These
parameters can be organized into groups according to their nature and
meaning. The groups can be structured hierarchically since some
parameters depend on other parameters in order to be used in an activity
155. Furthermore, not all groups of parameters are necessarily used to
define all activities in the space.

An activity is characterized by a combination of parameter values
selected in each group of the activity space (necessary for its
characterization) in respect of the hierarchy. An activity space groups
all possible distinct combinations of parameter values that can define
an activity in this space156.

Figure 23 is an example of the process of selecting an activity in an
activity space. In this space, group 1 is the first in the hierarchy. It
groups the “type of activity” parameters. This group is composed of a
single parameter (T) with 2 values (1 and 2). The activity can therefore
be of type T1 or T2. Following the hierarchy, each type T of activity
must pass through a particular group of difficulty (group 2 for T1 or
group 3 for T2). Each of these groups has a parameter (level) with three
values (1, 2 and 3). Then, group 4 is the last one of the hierarchy and
allows the attribution of modalities. This group has two parameters
(shape and color) with respectively 2 (square and circle) and 3 values
(Black, Blue and Red). The combination of the example leads to the
proposal of an activity of type T2 (group 1), of level 1 difficulty
(group 3) and has two modalities (group 4): square, blue.

The algorithms mentioned above will allow efficient use of this activity
space in order to offer pertinent, personalized and motivating
activities for the learner. They will be studied in more detail in the
following paragraphs.

Multi-Armed Bandit

The Multi-Armed Bandit EXP4 algorithm consists, globally, in assigning
an initial weight to each action, which quantifies the interest of this
action in the current task. An action is then drawn according to both
the weights and chance, in relation to a probability of

154“These parameters and their respective values define all the possible
activities that can be instantiated inside the activity space” (Clément,
2018). 155“Depending on their nature and meaning, these parameters can
be organized in different groups. […] In addition, these parameter
groups can be structured hierarchically, since some parameters depend on
others to be used in an activity” (Clément, 2018). 156“An activity space
groups all possible distinct combinations of parameter values that can
define an activity in this space” (Clément, 2018). 88

gaining. The probability of gaining is estimated thanks to the
exploration/exploitation trade- off. This trade-off requires making a
choice between what is known in order to obtain a reward close to what
is expected (exploitation), and what is uncertain in order to possibly
learn more (exploration)157.

Initially, the exploration part is stronger since no reward is known. It
is the observation of the reward obtained that makes possible to update
the weights attributed and consequently the probabilities of gain. Thus,
the activities giving a good level of learning progress (reward) must be
those selected most often. Since learning progress is not a stable
reward, it requires specific mechanisms to follow its evolution. Indeed,
an activity can cease to provide learning progress once the learner has
reached a certain level of expertise in the skill being worked on or in
the activity itself158. This implies that the rewards differ from one
learner to another. This is why the EXP4 variant of the Multi-Armed
Bandit algorithm was selected by Benjamin Clément and his collaborators.

A set of “expert agents”159 is then taken into account and the model
makes a choice based on the proposals of each internal expert agent. In
the case presented here, the experts are a set of variables that follow
the evolution of the reward provided by each activity. These “expert
bandits” are used to evaluate the quality of each activity parameter
value during the learner’s work session160.

Thus, Benjamin Clément explains that, for each parameter within a group,
the quality of its values is evaluated by an “agent-expert bandit”. An
expert follows the reward provided by each value over the last few
samplings to compute its quality. At a given time, the value to use for
each parameter is sampled according to the probabilities. This sampling
methodology leads to selecting stochastically (by chance) a value,
proportionally to its quality and its exploration rate. When the
exploration rate is low, the value of the parameter is chosen according
to its quality. Conversely, when the exploration rate is high, low
quality parameter values have a higher probability of being selected. To
generate an activity, this process is performed in a recursive manner on
the groups involved in the activity generation, according to the
hierarchical dependencies between the parameter groups161. This leads to
a stochastic drawing of the activity, resulting from the combination of
each sampled parameter value according to the assessment of their
quality by each agent-expert (Clément, 2018]).

The selected activity is proposed to the learner for resolution. The
reward level

157“The exploration-exploitation trade-off is a fundamental dilemma
whenever you learn about the world by trying things out. The dilemma is
between choosing what you know and getting something close to what you
expect (“exploitation”) and choosing something you aren’t sure about and
possibly learning more (“exploration”)" (Clément, 2018). 158“A
particularity here is the reward (learning progress) which is
non-stationary. This requires specific mechanisms to track its
evolution. Indeed, a given activity will stop providing a reward, or
learning progress, after the student reaches a certain mastery level of
the skill or of the activity” (Clément, 2018). 159The general term
“expert” is borrowed from Cesa-Bianchi et al (1997). They use it to
refer to the strategies used in “expert-advised prediction” algorithms,
“combining the predictions of several prediction strategies.” (Clement,
2018). 160“Thus, the framework introduced here rely on a variant of the
EXP4 algorithm, proposed initially by (Auer et al., 2003), which
considers a set of experts and make a choice based on the proposals of
each expert. In case presented here, the experts are a set of variables
that track how much reward each activity is providing (Lopes and
Oudeyer, 2012). These bandit experts are used to evaluate the quality of
each activity parameter value during the learner’s working session”
(Clément, 2018). 161See section 3.2. 89

3 , paragraph “Activity Space” and figure 23.

obtained (learning progress) allows the expert-agents to update the
quality of each parameter value used. All this would cause the
exploration of all the activities generated in the activity space. This
leads the author (Clement, 2018) to identify two resulting drawbacks:

● The type and difficulty of the exercises offered could change too
often and reduce

learner motivation and engagement.

● It may not be possible to explore all activity parameters to estimate
their learning

progress.

In order to overcome these drawbacks, the author was inspired by the
theory of the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) and the concept of
flow162. It is then a pedagogical expert (or several) who defines the
activity space and, consequently, the hierarchy of activities within it
as well as the parameters/value pairs. The aim is to propose only the
most pertinent activities and to keep the learner in the zone of
proximal development or in the flow zone.

The level of difficulty of the activities related to the skill level of
the learner determines what state the latter is in during learning, as
shown in Figure 24. Thus a level of difficulty that is too high in
relation to the level of competence of the learner will generate a state
of anxiety. Conversely, an insufficient level of difficulty compared to
the skill level will cause a state of boredom. The state of flow is
reached when the skill level and the level of difficulty are almost
proportional. The zone of proximal development is one level above, that
is, the proposed activity is slightly above the learner’s current
abilities, allowing the maximum level of learning progress to be
generated while maintaining learner motivation and engagement.
Furthermore, the use of the zone of proximal development makes it
possible to reduce the need for quantitative measurements initially
necessary for the expert and makes it possible to provide a more
predictive choice of activity163.

The ZPDES algorithm

The aim of the ZPDES algorithm is to propose to the learner the
activities that allow for maximum learning progress while reducing as
much as possible the dependence of the model on the cognitive/learner
models164. It is the zone of proximal development established by a
pedagogical expert that makes it possible to define the set of
activities that can be proposed in a way that is consistent with the
learner’s estimated level of competence. Benjamin Clément and his
collaborators have represented this in the form of a graph as shown in
Figure 25.

In the example shown in Figure 25, the activity graph is represented in
three states. It shows three types of activity (orange disks) of varying
difficulty. The difficulty of the activities

162“Inspired by the Zone of Proximal Development theory (Vygotsky,
1930-1934/1978) and the concept of Flow (M. Csikszentmihalyi and I.
Csikszentmihalyi, 1975), a pedagogical expert has the possibility to
specify rules that define an evolving set of possible/activated
activities, judged relevant for the student. These activities keep the
student in the zone of Flow or in the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD)
based on his successive results’’ (Clément, 2018). 163”The use of the
ZPD offers three advantages : it helps to improve motivation as
discussed before, it further reduces the need of quantitative metrics
for the educational design expert and it provides a more predictive
choice of activities" (Clément, 2018). 164“Two sources of inspiration
are used to simplify the algorithm [RiARiT]: Zone of Proximal
Development (C. D. Lee, 2005) and the empirical estimation of learning
progress (Oudeyer and Kaplan, 2007)” (Clément, 2018). 90

increases according to their type (C is more difficult than B which is
more difficult than A). A type groups several activities of increasing
level (A3 is more difficult than A2 which is more difficult than A1).

The initial state (Figure 25a) shows that Activity 1, type A, was
proposed to the learner (blue circle). It is located in the zone of
proximal development (yellow zone) and has the lowest level of
difficulty.

In Figure 25b, the learner has completed the activity and passed (green
circle). The algorithm then proposes another activity in the zone of
proximal development that has evolved thanks to the update of the
learner’s progress level. The level of progress has been updated
according to the result obtained in the first activity. The second
proposed activity (blue circle) is of the same type but of a higher
level of difficulty.

Figure 25c shows the next state of the graph. Here, the learner has not
succeeded in the previously proposed activity (black circle). The zone
of proximal development has been adapted again, taking into account the
level of progress. Since the A2 activity was not successful,
intermediate level activities were added to the zone and the higher
level activity was removed (A3). Therefore, Activity B1 was proposed.

The activities can be proposed with a certain amount of randomness among
the activities of the zone of proximal development likely to maximize
the level of progress, that is to say the state (success or failure) of
the activities previously performed (the closest). Thus, in graph 25c,
if the learner succeeds in activity B1, it is possible that activity B2
or C1 will be proposed to him according to the evolution of the zone of
proximal development which is defined according to the level of
difficulty of the activities in the graph and the state of success of
the previous activities.

To summarize, one (or more) pedagogical experts create the activity
space represented as a graph. The activities are distributed in the
graph according to their type and level of difficulty, as in figure 25.
The graph is traversed according to the learner’s results and the
evolution of the zone of proximal development.

The zone of proximal development is established by taking into account
the hierarchy of the activity space graph in order to maintain the
learning progression. The zone encompasses the activities of the graph
with a higher level of difficulty than the activity performed by the
learner165. The learning progress is the reward of the algorithm166.

Once the zone of proximal development is established, the algorithm
stochastically proposes an activity contained in the zone. That is to
say that the choice of the activity depends on probabilities calculated
with a random part (exploration) while taking into account the level of
competence (exploitation). This is the exploration/exploitation
compromise.

The learner performs the proposed activity. His or her success or
failure allows the reward to be updated, i.e., the level of progress
that also takes into account the results of the

165It is the activities closest to the activity performed that
constitute the zone of proximal development in order to offer slightly
more difficult activities to promote learning progression. 166Since it
is reinforcement-based machine learning, it adapts its predictions
according to the level of reward it receives. 91

previous activities. When progress stagnates, the zone of proximal
development evolves to propose more difficult activities. Similarly, if
the reward decreases, the zone of proximal development is re-evaluated,
thus proposing another type of activity of the same level or a lower
level activity.

The RiARiT algorithme

The RiARiT algorithm is heavily informed about the activity domain and
the learner, which makes it quite dependent on the learner’s model. The
information needed by the algorithm is used to design the cognitive
model by estimating the learner’s skill level based on their responses
to each activity and the definition of a set of skill components for
each activity167. The resulting model is also used to tailor the zone of
proximal development.

RiARiT takes a table as input containing the skill components worked on
in the activity space. This activity space is itself characterized by
activity parameters and values. The author uses what are called
q-values168. The q-values (quality values) are continuous numbers
between 0 and 1, where 1 means that the value of the parameter provides
the entire level of competence that it is possible to acquire with this
parameter for the competence component worked on. Conversely, a q-value
equal to 0 indicates that the value of the parameter does not allow the
acquisition of this competence component.

The algorithm takes into account these components and parameters, set by
one (or more) expert, to establish the zone of proximal development. To
do this, it estimates the learner’s skill level and adjusts the zone
according to the difference between the expected level (set in the
table) and the estimated level in order to propose the most relevant
activity at a given time t. It is this difference that constitutes the
algorithm’s reward for each component.

Specifically, if the estimated skill level is lower than the expected
skill level, then the learner’s level was underestimated (the activity
was too easy), resulting in a positive reward. Conversely, if the
estimated skill level is higher than the expected skill level, then the
learner’s skill level was overestimated (the activity was too
difficult), resulting in a negative reward.

When the learner gives a correct answer and the reward is positive then
the estimated skill level is updated. Similarly, when the learner gives
a wrong answer and the reward is negative, the estimated skill level is
also updated. However, in other cases, the estimated skill level is kept
until the next update.

The area of proximal development is also updated based on the new
estimated

competence value.

Alternatively, the evolution of the zone of proximal development can be
based on explicit values of the learner’s level of competence. The
pedagogical expert can specify the

167“It is strongly informed about the activities domain and the student.
This information will be used to build a cognitive model of the student
by estimating the knowledge level of the learner depending on his answer
to each activity and the definition of a set of Knowledge Component (KC)
related to each activity” (Clément, 2018). 168“The q-values notion take
its inspiration from the work of Barnes (2005) where she defines a Q-
matrix or “attribute by item incidence matrix” to define relations
between questions (activities in our case) and concepts (KCs in our
case) and contains a one if a question is related to a concept and a
zero if not" (Clément, 2018). 92

minimum level of competence required in a given competence component.
Thus, each parameter value will be explored only if the learner’s skill
level is above the threshold value. Pedagogical experts are allowed to
define the threshold for which a given parameter is removed from
exploration, its agent-expert bandit is then deactivated169.

This is consistent with theories of intrinsic motivation, which clearly
suggest that motivation and learning increase if the level of activities
offered is just a little above the current level170.

In conclusion, this algorithm uses a lot of information about the domain
of activity. The pedagogical expert defines tables with the relationship
between parameter values and competency components, as well as a set of
minimum competency levels to activate a new parameter value. The
relationship between the success of an activity, the estimated skill
level, and the required skill level of an activity allows two things:

● Estimate the level of the learner.

● Calculate rewards for this activity171.

The information required for this algorithm is more computed over time
than many other Intelligent Tutoring Systems, as this a priori
information can be very difficult for a pedagogical expert to give when
the number of activities, or competence components, is high. Automatic
methods for filling in this knowledge already exist and are being
actively researched172.

Comparison of the RiARiT and ZPDES algorithms

Experiments have been conducted to test the effectiveness of these
algorithms (Clémentet al., 2014b) (Clément et al., 2014a) (Clément et
al., 2015) (Clément, 2018). It appears that learners make more and
faster progress using these algorithms. The RiARit algorithm being based
on a priori data is somewhat more efficient than ZPDES. However, it is
not easily transferable to other domains with more data because the
inventory of components and parameters would be too large to be
feasible. The difference in efficiency with ZPDES, in terms of learning
progress, is small enough to favor the latter, especially for

169“Here the evolution of the ZPD can rely on explicit values of the
estimated competence level of the learner. Thus, the expert can specify
minimal competence levels in given KC that are required to allow the
algorithm to try a given parameter values and activate its related
bandit expert. Each parameter value is only explored if the learner is
already above this minimum threshold. The teaching experts are allowed
to define a threshold for which a given parameter is removed from the
exploration, its bandit expert is deactivated” (Clément, 2018). 170“This
follows well known instructional design methodologies (Gagne and Briggs,
1974) and concords with theories of intrinsic motivation which clearly
suggest motivation and learning improve if exercises are proposed at
levels that are only slightly higher than the current level (Engeser and
Rheinberg, 2008 ; Habgood and Ainsworth, 2011)” (Clément, 2018).
171“RiARiT algorithm uses a lot of information about the domain. The
teaching expert defines tables with the relation between the parameter
values and the KC, and also a set of minimum competence levels to
activate a new parameter value. The relation between the success of an
exercise, the estimated competence level and the required competence
level of an exercise allows two things : a) to estimate the level of the
student ; and b) to compute a reward for that activity” (Clément, 2018).
172“The information required for this algorithm is more online than a
lot of other ITS systems but this amount of information might be really
difficult to give for a teaching expert when the number of activities,
or KC, is high. Automatic methods to fill such knowledge already exist
and is an area of active research (Baker et al., 2008; Dhanani et al.,
2014; González-Brenes, Huang, et al., 2014; González-Brenes and Mostow,
2012)” (Clément, 2018). 93

domains with too much or insufficiently defined starting data.

Moreover, the use of these algorithms as Intelligent Tutoring Systems
has not only promoted learning progress but also maintained the state of
flow in learners [Oudeyer et al., 2016]. On the other hand, they do not
allow the identification of the cause (environment, tool, learner’s
peculiarities, etc.) and the subject (a competence component or an
activity parameter, etc.) of the errors made during the activity
sequence. This implies, on the one hand, the possibility of using
machine learning to arouse the curiosity and intrinsic motivation of
learners and thus promote progress and, on the other hand, to supervise
these activities in a human way so as to identify the difficulties of
each learner in order to work on them differently or to act on the
learning conditions.

3.3 Modeling intrinsic motivation in learning: conclusion

This section has highlighted the role of intrinsic motivation in
learning. The work of the FLOWERS team has allowed us to understand the
mechanisms of Intelligent Tutoring Systems and the role that digital
technology can play in improving learning by taking into account
intrinsic motivation.

The algorithms of the FLOWERS team and the experiments conducted show
the importance of adding the motivational dimension to the ontological
model of the learner initiated within the exploratory action AIDE.

References

Abgrall, J.P. (2012). Stimuler la mémoire et la motivation des élèves.
esf éditeur.

Alexandre, F. (2021). A global framework for a systemic view of brain
modeling.

Brain Informatics. https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03143843

Besnier, J.-M. (2021). Les théories de la connaissance. Presses
Universitaires de

France.
https://www.cairn.info/les-theories-de-la-connaissance–9782715406032.htm

Breedlove, S. M., Rosenzweig, M. R., & Watson, N. V. (2012).
Psychobiologie. De

ma biologie du neurone aux neurosciences comportementales, cognitives et

cliniques. de boeck.

Brouillard, P. (2021). Apprentissage de modèles causaux par réseaux de
neurones

artificiels.

Université

de

Montréal.

https://papyrus.bib.umontreal.ca/xmlui/handle/1866/25096

Burglen, F. (2005). Etudes du mécanisme de binding en mémoire de travail
et de la

boucle phonologique chez le patient schizophrène. Université Louis
Pasteur,

Strasbourg.

94

Carré, P., & Fenouillet, F. (2019). Traité de psychologie de la
motivation. Dunod.

https://www.cairn.info/traite-de-psychologie-de-la-motivation–9782100783045.htm

Censabella, S. (2007). In Bilan neuropsychologique de l’enfant. Mardaga.

https://www.cairn.info/bilan-neuropsychologique-de-l-enfant–9782870099643-page-

117.htm

Chang, C.-Y., Tijus, C., & Zibetti, E. (2015). Les apprentissages à
l’heure des

technologies cognitives numériques.

In

Administration & éducation.

https://www.cairn.info/revue-administration-et-education-2015-2-page-91.htm?

contenu=article

Chappell, T. (2019). Plato on knowledge in the Theaetetus. Stanford
Encyclopedia of

Philosophy.

Chaudet,

B.  

(2009).

Donnée,

information,

connaissance.

https://brunochaudet.wordpress.com/2009/03/30/donnee-information-connaissance/

Chekour, M., Mohammed, L., & Janati-Idrissi, R. (2015). L’évolution des
théories de

l’apprentissage

à

l’ère

du

numérique.

Association

EPI.

https://www.epi.asso.fr/revue/articles/a1502b.htm#BPAGE

Chi, M. T., & Wylie, R. (2014). The icap framework :Linking cognitive
engagement to

active learning outcomes. Educational Psychologist, 49(4).

Cieutat, P., & Connac, S. (2017). Constructivisme ou enseignement
explicite ? Les

cahiers pédagogique - Cercle de recherche et d’action pédagogiques.

https://www.cahiers-pedagogiques.com/constructivisme-ou-enseignement-explicite/

Clément, B. (2018). Adaptive personalization of pedagogical sequences
using

machine learning.

Artificial Intelligence [cs.AI]. Université de Bordeaux.

https://hal.inria.fr/tel-01968241/file/CLEMENT_BENJAMIN_2018.pdf

Clément, B., Roy, D., Oudeyer, P.-Y., & Lopes, M. (2014a). Developmental
learning

for intelligent tutoring systems. IEEE ICDL-Epirob - The Fourth Joint
IEEE

International Conference on Development and Learning and on Epigenetic
Robotics.

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01061195v2

Clément, B., Roy, D., Oudeyer, P.-Y., & Lopes, M. (2014b). Online
optimization of

95

teaching sequences with multi-armed bandits. 7th International
Conference on

Educational Data Mining. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01016428

Clément, B., Roy, D., Oudeyer, P.-Y., & Lopes, M. (2015). Multi-armed
bandits for

intelligent tutoring systems.

Journal of Edu-cational Data Mining,

7(2).

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-00913669

Conein, B. (2004). Cognition distribuée, groupe social et technologie
cognitive. In

Réseaux. https://www.cairn.info/revue-reseaux1-2004-2-page-53.htm

Connac, S. (2018). Neuroéducation et pédagogie. Éducation et
socialisation. Les

Cahiers du CERFEE, 49. https://journals.openedition.org/edso/3556

Damasio, A. R. (1998). motion in the perspective of an integrated
nervous system.

Brain

Research

Reviews,

26. 

https://edisciplinas.usp.br/pluginfile.php/5706589/mod_resource/content/1/emotion-

in-the-perspective-of-an-integrated-nervous-system.pdf

Dehaene, S. (2018). Apprendre ! Les talents du cerveau, le défi des
machines. Odile

Jacob.

Delacour, J. (2001).

Conscience et cerveau : La nouvelle frontière des

neurosciences. Neurosciences & cognition.
https://www.cairn.info/conscience-et-

cerveau–9782804137663-page-5.htm

Dietrich, A. (2004). The cognitive neuroscience of creativity.
Psychonomic Bulletin &

Review, 11. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196731

Donoso, M. (2013). Le cerveau stratège : les fondements du raisonnement
dans le

cortex préfrontal humain.

Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6.

http://www.theses.fr/2013PA066535

Duplàa, E., & Talaat, N. (2011). Connectivisme et formation en ligne. In
Distances et

savoirs

(Vol. 9). https://www.cairn.info/revue-distances-et-savoirs-2011-4-page-

541.htm

Evans, J. (2011). Dual-process theories of reasoning : Contemporary
issues ans

developmental applications. Developmental Review, 31(2-3).

Faugloire, E. (2007). Approche dynamique de l’apprentissage de
coordinations

96

posturales. Université Paris Sud - Paris XI.
https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-

00128845/document

Fenouillet, F. (2016). Les théories de la motivation. Dunod.

Frayssinhes, J. (2019). Compétence, expérience, connaissances et savoirs

transférables. https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02939062/document

Frayssinhes, J., & Pasquier, F. (2018). Neurosciences et apprentissages
via les

réseaux numériques. Éducation et socialisation. Les Cahiers du CERFEE,
49.

https://journals.openedition.org/edso/3920

Garnier, C., & Sauvé, L. (1999). Apport de la théorie des
représentations sociales à

l’éducation relative à l’environnement - conditions pour un design de
recherche.

CIRADE, université du Quebec.

Gasc, M. (2016). Étude de la fonction symbolique chez des enfants de 3 à
5 ans

présentant un retard de parole et/ou de langage. http://thesesante.ups-

tlse.fr/1756/1/3405A201611.pdf

George, C. (1997). Polymorphisme du raisonnement humain. Presses
Universitaires

de France.

Godin, C. (2004). Dictionnaire de philosophie. Paris Fayard.

Goldman, S. (2005). La croyance : aux confins mystérieux de la cognition
(25th ed.,

Vol. 2).
https://www.cairn.info/revue-cahiers-de-psychologie-clinique-2005-2-page-

87.htm

Gottlieb, J., Oudeyer, P.-Y., Lopes, M., & Baranes, A. (2013).
Information-seeking,

curiosity, and attention : computational and neural mechanisms. Trends
in Cognitive

Sciences. http://www.pyoudeyer.com/TICSCuriosity2013.pdf

Goutte, V., & Ergis, A.-M. (2011). Traitement des émotions dans les
pathologies

neurodégénératives : une revue de la littérature. In Revue de
neuropsychologie (Vol.

3).

https://www.cairn.info/revue-de-neuropsychologie-2011-3-page-161.htm?

contenu=article

Guilford, J. P. (1956). Structure of intellect. Psychological Bulletin.

Guillemette, F. (2004). Favoriser l’apprentissage en favorisant la
motivation

97

intrinsèque.

Observatoire de la pédagogie en enseignement supérieur.

https://oraprdnt.uqtr.uquebec.ca/Gsc/Portail-ressources-enseignement-

sup/documents/PDF/Motivation_intrinseque_motivation_extrinseque.pdf

Habib, M., Lavergne, L., & Caparos, S. (2018). Psycho-logie cognitive.
Armand Colin.

Han, J., Shi, F., Chen, L., & Childs, P.R. (2018). A computational tool
for creative

idea generation based on analogical reasoning and ontology. In
Artificial Intelligence

for Engineering Design Analysis and Manufacturing.

Hart, J. T. (1965). Memory and the feeling-of-knowing experience. J
Educat Psychol,

56(4), 208-216. https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1965-13971-001

Hoareau, V. (2018). Etudes des mécanismes de maintien en mémoire de
travail chez

les personnes jeunes et âgées : approches computationnelle et
comportementale

basées sur les modèles tbrs et sob-cs.

Université Grenoble Alpes.

https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-01746120

Houdé, O. (2018b). L’école du cerveau. Margada.

Houdé, O. (2018a). Le raisonnement. Presses Universitaires de France.

Houdé, O., Borst, G., André, C., Berthoz, A., Changeux,, J.-P.,
Damasion, A.,

Damasio, H., Eustache, F., Fayol, M., Lachaux, J.-P., Peigneux, P.,
Prado, J.,

Proust, J., Jeanne, S.-F., & Johannes, Z. (2018). Le cerveau et les
apprentissages.

Nathan.

Kadosch, M. (2019).

L’analogie, modèle de l’abduction. http://www.marcel-

kadosch.eu/lanalogie-modele-de-labduction/

Kerzil, J. (2009). In L’ABC de la VAE. Erès.
https://www.cairn.info/l-abc-de-la-vae–

9782749211091-page-112.htm

Khanfir Kallel, I. (2019). Mécanismes de raisonnement possibiliste pour
l’aide à la

décision et l’interprétation de scènes.

Traitement du signal et de l’image.

https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-02868499

Kleinginna, P., & Kleinginna, A. (1981). A categorized list of emotion
definitions with

suggestions for a consensual definition. Motiv Emotion, 5.

Lachaux, J.-P. (2018). Éduquer la métacognition, la clé du succès pour
les enfants !

98

In Cerveau et psycho.

Lee, V. (2018). A Short History of the Learning Sciences. In R.E. West,
Foundations

of Learning and Instructional Design Technology : The Past, Present, and
Future of

Learning and

Instructional

Design Technology.

EdTech Books.

https://edtechbooks.org/lidtfoundations

Le Gall, D., Besnard, J., Havet, V., Pinon, K., & Allain, P. (2009).
Contrôle exécutif,

cognition sociale, émotions et métacognition. In Revue de
neuropsychologie (Vol. 1,

pp. 24-33).
https://www.cairn.info/revue-de-neuropsychologie-2009-1-page-24.htm?

contenu=article

Leleu-Galland, E., Gallois, J.-B., & Létang, M. (2021). Comment apprend
le

cerveau ? Nathan.

Lemaire, P., & Didierjean, A. (2018). Introduction à la psychologie
cognitive. deboeck

supérieur.

Lieto,

A.  

(2021).

Cognitive Design

for Artificial

Minds. Wikipedia.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_architecture

Lieto, A., Oltramari, A., & Vernon, D. (2018). The role of cognitive
architectures in

general

artificial

intelligence.

Cognitive Systems Research,

48,

1-3.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S138904171730222X?via

%3Dihub

Lieury, A. (2017). 35 grandes notions de psychologie cognitives. Dunod.

Lieury, A., & Léger, L. (2020). Introduction à la psychologie cognitive.
Dunod.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S138904171730222X?via

%3Dihub

Masmoudi, S., & Naceur, A. (2010). Du percept à la décision :
Intégration de la

cognition, l’émotion et la motivation. De Boeck Supérieur.
https://www.cairn.info/du-

percept-a-la-decision–9782804137984.htm

Mercier, C., Alexandre, F., & Viéville, T. (2021a). Reinforcement
symbolic learning.

The 30th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks.

Mercier, C., Roux, L., Romero, M., Alexandre, F., & Viéville, T.
(2021b). Formalizing

99

problem-solving in computational thin-king : an ontology approach.

IEEE

International Conference on Development and Learning.

Métayer, M. (2012). Qu’est-ce que la philosophie ? À la découverte de la
rationalité.

Pearson (Erpi).

Miller, G.A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two : Some
limits on

our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review.

Morgagni, S. (2011). Repenser la notion d’affordance dans ses dynamiques

sémiotiques. In Intellectica. Revue de l’Association pour la Recherche
Cognitive.

https://www.persee.fr/doc/intel_0769-4113_2011_num_55_1_1170

Morin, E. (1999). La tête bien faite. Repenser la réforme. Réformer la
pensée. Paris,

Seuil.

Morin, E. (2011). La voie. Pour l’avenir de l’humanité. Paris, Fayard.

Nguyen-Xuan, A. (2021). Les mécanismes cognitifs de l’apprentissage.
iSTE

éditions.

Noël, M.-P. (2007). In Bilan neuropsychologique de l’enfant. Mardaga.

https://www.cairn.info/bilan-neuropsychologique-de-l-enfant–9782870099643.htm

Norman, D. (1988). The Psychology of Everyday Things. Basic Books.

Oudeyer, P.-Y., Gottlieb, J., & Lopes, M. (2016). Intrinsic motivation,
curiosity and

learning : theory and applications in educational technologies. Progress
in brain

research.

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-

01404278/file/oudeyerGottliebLopesPBR16Preprint.pdf

Pailler, J.-J. (2004). Spinoza avait raison. joie et tristesse, le
cerveau des émotions,

d’antonio

r.  

damasio.

In

Revue

française de psychosomatique.

https://www.cairn.info/revue-francaise-de-psychosomatique-2004-1-page-165.htm?

contenu=article

Purves, D., Augustine, G.J., Fitzpatrick, D., Hall, W. C., LaMantia,
A.-S., & White, L.

E. (2015). Neurosciences. de boeck supérieu.

Rao, M. G. (1995). Bdi-agents : From theory to practice. Proceedings of
the First

International Conference on Multiagent Systems (ICMAS’95).

100

Reeve, J. (2017). Psychologie de la motivation et des émotions. De
Boeck supérieur.

Romero, M. (2004). Métacognition dans les eiah.

LIUM. Le Mans.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/237012128_Metacognition_dans_les_EIAH

Romero, M., David, D., & Lille, B. (2018). Creacube, a playful activity
with modular

robotics.

Games

and

Learning

Alliance.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/329040986_CreaCube_a_playful_activity_

with_modular_robotics

Romero, M., & Giraudon, G. (2020). Le numérique va révolutionner
l’éducation . . .

vraiment ? https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02895694

Rougier,

N.  

(2015).

L’intelligence artificielle,

mythes et

réalités.

https://interstices.info/lintelligence-artificielle-mythes-et-realites/

Roux, L., Romero, M., Alexandre, F., Viéville, T., & Mercier, C. (2020).

Développement d’une ontologie pour l’analyse d’observables de
l’apprenant dans le

contexte d’une tâche avec des robots modulaire.
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03013685v2

Stordeur, J. (2014). Comprendre, apprendre, mémoriser : les
neurosciences au

service de la pédagogie. de boeck éducation.

Szczepanski, N. (2012). Méthodes efficaces de raisonnement en logique
modale.

entre de Recherche en Informatique de Lens, Université d’Artois.
http://www.cril.univ-

artois.fr/~szczepanski/res/Methodes%20efficaces%20de%20raisonnement%20en

%20logique%20modale%20-%20Szczepanski%20Nicolas.pdf

Tardif, E., & Doudin, P.-A. (2016). Neurosciences et cognition :
Perspectives pour les

sciences de l’éducation. de boeck supérieur.

Toscani, P., Eustache, F., Devière, F., Allard, B., Asseline, S., Aubin,
C., Avrillon, C.,

Avrillon, D., Beauperin, C., Bernard, M.F., Bourdin, F., Bourget, C.,
Campedel, M.,

David, B., Delanoue, J., Garnier, A., Gauvrit, A., Gouyette, J.,
Helsens, O., …

Zendrera, N. (2017). Les neurosciences de l’éducation, de la théorie à
la pratique en

classe. Chronique Sociale. Auteur(e)s membres du GRENE :Groupe de
Recherche

En Neurosciences Educatives.

Vacher, Y. (2011). La pratique réflexive.

Recherche et formation, 66.

101

http://journals.openedition.org/rechercheformation/1133

Figure 23 - Selection of an activity in the activity space

This figure is inspired by a diagram by Benjamin Clément [Clément,
2018]. It represents an example of activity

102

selection in the activity space (gray shape) with four hierarchical
groups (orange shapes). Each group has one or more parameters (yellow
rectangles) which themselves have values (green shapes). The thin blue
arrows show the hierarchy between the groups while the big blue arrow
represents the selection process pointing to a big blue rectangle. This
one is a selection possibility (an example of activity selection). The
small blue rectangles on the left and right represent the possible
combinations of values at the end of each group.

Figure 24 - Zone of proximal development and Flow.

This figure is a diagram made by Benjamin Clément (Clément, 2018). It is
a graph representing the states in which a learner may be when
performing an activitya. The level of difficulty is on the y-axis while
the learner’s skill level is represented on the x-axis.

a“Basawapatna et al. (2013) propose the concept of Zones of Proximal
Flow where they come up with the idea of the Zone of Proximal
Development being located in between regions of Flow and anxiety”
(Clément, 2018).

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

Figure 25 - Example of an activity graph with evolution of the zone of
proximal development.

This figure is a diagram done by Benjamin Clément (Clément et al.,
2015). It is an example of a breakdown of activities made by an
educational expert. The activities are organized by level of difficulty
and type. The zone of proximal development (ZPD) represents all the
activities de l’espace d’activité pouvant être proposées pour favoriser
le plus efficacement possible le progrès d’apprentissage.

103

104


