When a Master of Sciences on EdTech becomes an
International Community
Margarida Romero, Saint-Clair Lefèvre, Thierry Viéville

To cite this version:

Margarida Romero, Saint-Clair Lefèvre, Thierry Viéville. When a Master of Sciences on EdTech
becomes an International Community. ERCIM News, 2020. ￿hal-02418510￿

HAL Id: hal-02418510

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02418510

Submitted on 18 Dec 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

When a Master of Sciences on EdTech becomes an International Community 

by Margarida Romero

1
​, Saint-Clair Lefèvre 

1
​ and Thierry Viéville 

1,2 

1 
​Learning, Innovation and Education (LINE), Université Côte d’Azur 

2 
​Mnémosyne, INRIA 

Nelson Mandela said, "Education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change 

the world." How do we best achieve this? Part of the answer may lie in Smart EdTech, a 

Master of Science (MSc) program specialising in digital education. 

The MSc SmartEdTech program [L1] at Université Côte d’Azur aims to develop a quality 

approach to digital education with a co-creative and participative education. The program is 

embedded within a socioeconomic sensibility, specifically related to the 

Global Goals of the 

United Nations in relation to education

 [L2]. The challenge is to both improve today's 

education and create tomorrow’s education, by means of breakthrough digital pedagogies. 

The 21st century educational skills go beyond knowledge and know-how to include 
Figure 1:
​
​

important personal and collective competences, and societal values. 

As illustrated in Figure 1, the end goal is to allow everyone to develop the “21st century 

​
​
​
​
​
 
 
 
skills”, focusing in critical thinking, creativity, problem solving, collaboration and 

computational thinking as key skills for citizens [1]. We also illustrate how this could apply 

to computational thinking as a key competency to solve problems through the knowledge of 

formal systems (how to code) and physical systems (what is a sensor, how a network works, 

etc). Through computational thinking development, the students should be able to not only 

use technology for education but engage in the critical approach of analysing problem 

situations, identify technologies to solve these problems. 

The MSc SmartEdTech has been designed with an objective of inclusivity to ensure that the 

students are selected based on their projects and potential [2]. In order to develop an 

international community, 90% of the program is online, based on open reusable resources in 

English and some in French. This blended training also includes two intensive weeks, to 

really meet each other, and to learn and share and intern periods, inside either an EdTech 

company, or an educational research lab, while some students develop their own spin-off 

company. Msc SmartEdTech students are expected to become the future e-learning or digital 

innovation project managers, instructional designers, teacher or e-learning instructors, edTech 

consultants or researchers in the learning sciences. Students within the MSc SmartEdTech 

program are professionals from a diverse range of backgrounds including quality assurance 

professionnals in Higher Education, teachers and university professors, app developers and 

freelancers in the field of EdTech. MSc SmartEdTech are also engaged in teaching activities 

within the MSc, embodying the “communities of practices” (CoP) paradigm, in which 

everyone has the potential to act as a resource for the community. 

As students, they will address the challenges of designing and integrating EdTech in their 

different educational contexts. Our conviction is that they have to learn how to learn, 

concretely, via effective competence development. The activities developed in the program 

support active learning approaches through co-creation approaches, Digital game based 

learning (DGBL), maker education and maker culture. With these different activities, 

students are engaged to develop a critical understanding of digital sciences and embrace a 

paradigm of (co)creators of technologies and, therefore, are more than just EdTech 

consumers. The core of our paradigm is project-based learning (PBL), meaning that our 

approach puts everyone's professional project at the heart of learning, right from the start. As 

such, all courses become an opportunity to realise a given project, while each student has the 

opportunity to engage in small group teamwork or receive specific coaching. 

This MSc benefits from a threefold scientific approach, led by the Learning, INnovation and 

Education (LINE) research lab [L3], in computer science and education science. 

This EdTech MSc not only teaches high-tech tools, but also low-tech approaches. For 

instance, in order to teach children how a computer works, “unplugged activities”, coupled 

with creative programming initiation and education robotics, are the pillars of computational 

thinking learning [3]. In a nutshell, the main point is to use an everyday situation as a 

metaphor for a theoretical computer science concept. 

 Our approach is agnostic with respect to the available tools. This positioning is crucial given 

the huge social and environmental challenges facing our planet. Whilst the use of digital 

tools, in education or elsewhere, is neither a panacea, nor the inverse, there are a few things 

of which we are certain: (i) The core challenge is pedagogy: can digital tools help us improve 

the pedagogy we want to develop? 

The MSc has been running for 18 months and to date our team of nine teachers from six 

countries have helped about 40 colleagues to contribute to “changing the world through 

education”. Out of the 12 pioneer students two have created a company or other structure, 

three are working in research positions, two have been hired by EdTech companies, and the 

remainder are working on personal projects.

Figure 2: The #CreaSmartEdtech Msc international map, featuring 40 students from 25 

countries gathered to learn together, and start a true international community. 

 
Perhaps the most interesting and motivating aspect of this experience is the way in which this 

tiny, lively, global group has started to form a multicultural, interdisciplinary and 

international community, with a common objective, sharing ideas and practices, being. This 

is exactly what this initiative is striving for: to go beyond structured teaching and learning 

and to build an international community of practice (CoP) in 21st century education. 

Links: 

[L1] 

http://app.univ-cotedazur.fr/smartedtech 

[L2] https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/education/ 

[L3] 

http://unice.fr/laboratoires/line 

References: 

M. Romero, A. Lepage, B. Lille: “Computational thinking development through 

International Journal of Educational Technology 

[1]
creative programming in higher education”,
(1), 42, 2017. 
14
, 
in Higher Education
​
​

M. Ciussi, et al.: “Numérique et éducation … vous avez dit #CreaSmartEdtech ?”, 

[2]
2018. binaire.lemonde.fr, 

https://tinyurl.com/y6n5pwvr 

D.Menon, et al.: “Going beyond digital literacy to develop computational thinking in 

[3]
K-12 education”, L. Daniela, 
(Routledge), In press, 9780367333799, 2019.

, Taylor & Francis 
Smart Pedagogy of Digital Learning
​

 https://hal.inria.fr/hal-0228103 

Please contact: 

Margarida Romero 

UCA, INSPE, LINE, France 

margarida.romero@univ-cotedazur.fr 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
 
​
 
 
