Didactic of visual arts: Exploration of creative processes
with and without AI assistance in artistic projects.
Joseba K Cejudo, Cristina Miranda, Alfonso Berroya, Margarida Romero,

Margarida Romero

To cite this version:

Joseba K Cejudo, Cristina Miranda, Alfonso Berroya, Margarida Romero, Margarida Romero. Didac-
tic of visual arts: Exploration of creative processes with and without AI assistance in artistic projects..
Creativity and artificial intelligence in education, Jul 2024, Nice, France. ￿hal-04634801￿

HAL Id: hal-04634801

https://hal.science/hal-04634801

Submitted on 4 Jul 2024

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

RESEARCH PROJECT
by Joseba K. Cejudo (PhD student)

Directed by Dr. Cristina Miranda

Co-directed by Dr. Alfonso Berroya

Stay in Nice supervised by Dr. Margarida Romero

DIDACTIC OF VISUAL ARTS:
EXPLORATION OF CREATIVE PROCESSES
WITH AND WITHOUT AI ASSISTANCE
IN ARTISTIC PROJECTS

BILBAO

NICE

In artistic education, the need to understand 
how Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools can 
influence creativity and educational processes 
in the visual arts has been detected.
This thesis project investigates how the 
integration of AI in the teaching of visual arts 
affects the creative processes of students. 

PROBLEM STATEMENT

Digital reality is exerting an indisputable influence on 
artistic creation processes. A new context of creation, 
dissemination and reception, based on the 
technological society and the possibilities of 
networking, is profoundly transforming some 
conceptual parameters linked to the teaching of visual 
arts (Marfil & Álvarez, 2017). 

Although AIs dedicated to different tasks have spread, 
such as creating and manipulating images or videos, 
those that offer the option of natural language 
management are the ones that have had the most 
impact (García-Peñalbo et al., 2024).

We must aim to reflect on the importance and true 
usefulness of the implementation and assistance of AI 
in our teaching work (Padilla, 2019: p. 260).

How should the introduction of AI be implemented 
in university artistic teachings?

What differences do we find in creativity, 
perceptions and satisfaction between traditional 
methods and those that incorporate AI?

What recommendations to optimize visual arts 
teaching can we make to be at the forefront of 
innovation and development?

HYPOTHESIS

PROCEDURE

CONTRIBUTIONS

The integration of AI tools in the teaching of university 
visual arts would significantly improve the creativity 
and effectiveness of the educational process 
compared to traditional methods and would help 
avoid the technological gap, similar to what happened 
to those people of the preceding generation who were 
not trained in the use of digital tools.

24 students from the Faculty of Fine Arts of the 
UPV/EHU will be recruited through a selection 
process in which the highest ethical standards will be 
met in relation to the participation of individuals. The 
participants will be divided into two groups of twelve 
members each. Both groups will receive training in AI 
tools to create visual artifacts.

OBJECTIVES

Evaluate perceptions and satisfaction.

Identify differences in creativity.

Offer recommendations for the optimisation of 
didactics, developing specific strategies to 
effectively integrate AI tools into the curriculum.

METHODOLOGY

General approach: action research

The action research approach is a research 
methodology that combines research with practical 
interventions oriented to change and improvement in 
a specific context (Latorre, 2015).

The work of this doctoral thesis will be carried out in 
three phases: preparation (documentation), 
development (workshop) and definition (publications).

The core of the project will be a study with university 
students of artistic education from the UPV/EHU 
through a theoretical-practical workshop in which visual 
artifacts will be developed with the application of AI in 
the creative process for their subsequent analysis.

At first, both groups will work on a different topic 
without the help of the AI. Later they will exchange 
the theme and, this time, they will be able to use AI 
tools to create their artworks. Technical and artistic 
assistance will be available for both groups, with 
weekly follow-up sessions, during the completion of 
the projects.

Throughout the process, the progress, satisfaction 
and perception of the participants will be evaluated 
through surveys and thanks to an in-depth interview 
in the middle and at the end of the creation period.

A team of experts will carry out a qualitative analysis 
of the artistic works, based on criteria of creativity, 
innovation and technical quality.

Work on the same topic done with and without AI 
assistance can be compared. The performance of 
students with and without the help of AI working on 
the same type of project will also be comparable.

An exhibition of the works will be held, where the 
opinions of both professionals in the sector and the 
general public attending will be collected.

An interpretation of the interviews and feedback will 
be carried out, identifying patterns and recurring 
themes applying Grounded Theory.

The study will provide new insights into how AI tools 
can influence creative processes in the visual arts, 
providing a theoretical and empirical basis for future 
research in the field of arts education and technology.

The publication of three articles in high-impact 
indexed academic journals in areas such as artistic 
education, educational technology and creativity is 
expected, contributing to the existing literature and 
serving as a reference for researchers and educators. 

The research will develop and validate new teaching 
methodologies that integrate AI, providing a 
structured, evidence-based framework for application 
in diverse educational contexts.

REFERENCES

García-Peñalvo, F. J., Llorens-Largo, F. & Vidal, J. 

(2024). La nueva realidad de la educación ante los 
avances de la inteligencia artificial generativa. 
RIED-Revista Iberoamericana de Educación a 
Distancia, 27(1), 9-39.

Latorre, A. (2015). La investigación-acción: conocer y 

cambiar la práctica educativa.

Marfil Carmona, R. & Álvarez Rodríguez, M. D. 
(2018). El software creativo en la educación 
artística: reflexiones y posibilidades en torno a The 
next Rembrandt.

Padilla, R. D. M. (2019). La llegada de la inteligencia 

artificial a la educación. Revista de Investigación en 
Tecnologías de la Información: RITI, 7(14), 
260-270.

