Understanding Intelligently Artificial Intelligence : a citizens’ open
formation Frédéric Alexandre, Robert de Barretin, Jade Becker,
Marie-Hélène Comte,

Martine Courbin-Coulaud, Sonia Cruchon, Aurelie Lagarrigue, Bastien
Masse,

Sophie de Quatrebarbes, Julie Stein, et al.

To cite this version:

Frédéric Alexandre, Robert de Barretin, Jade Becker, Marie-Hélène Comte,
Martine Courbin-Coulaud, et al.. Understanding Intelligently Artificial
Intelligence : a citizens’ open formation. International Workshop on
Education in Artificial Intelligence K-12 (EduAI), Jul 2020, Ifrane,
Morocco. ￿hal- 02889682￿

HAL Id: hal-02889682

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02889682

Submitted on 4 Jul 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Understanding Intelligently Artificial Intelligence : a citizens’ open
formation.

Submitted tor

, if ok 10 pages paper before 10th july. Topics : K-12 AI educational
initiatives and projects, AI teaching concepts and materials, parental
involvement in AI-literacy.

2 pages abstract < 7th june

http://eduai.ist.tugraz.at

using this

format

    

8 ​, Robert de Barretin

7 ​, Jade Becker

2 ​, Aurélie Lagarrigue

4 ​, Bastien Masse

5 ​, Sophie de Quatrebarbes

2 2 ​, Sonia ​, Martine Courbin ​, Marie-Hélène Comte 7 ​, and ​, Claude
Terosier

6 ​, Julie Stein

https://team.inria.fr/mnemosyne

https://learninglab.inria.fr

​and

, Science Outreach Department

​.

1 Fréderic Alexandre 3 Cruchon 1 Thierry Viéville 1 ​ Inria, Mnémosyne
team, 2 ​ Inria, Learning Lab 3 ​ 4 minutes 34 4 ​ Université de Nantes
5 ​ S24B l’interactive 6 ​ La Ligue de l’enseignement 7 ​ Magic-Makers 8
​ DataBingo mailto:

https://data.bingo/ thierry.vieville@inria.fr

https://www.4minutes34.com

https://www.univ-nantes.fr

https://www.s24b.com

https://laligue.org

https://www.magicmakers.fr

Keywords

    Artificial intelligence for all, Computational thinking, Free
    reusable online resources, MOOC.

1.  

Context and Objectives

Our whole society is and will be deeply impacted by digital science and
this takes a new qualitative and quantitative turn with what is named
artificial intelligence (AI). We must allow everyone to master, thus
understand how all this works. This means computational thinking
discovery and machine learning initiation. Directly inspired by the
Finnish initiative to train 1% of its population on these subjects [1]
and after our success in providing a hybrid formation on computational
thinking for teachers and citizens not familiar with computer science
[2] where more 45000 persons have been reached, yielding a satisfaction
level higher than 90%, we have built and now operate a citizen training
in AI in the broad sense, intended to a large public beyond the [3].
ubiquitary citizen university in digital science and culture school
domain, with the goal of giving rise to an ​

2.  

Method and Production

, hybrid ​

performative and

attestation of attendance

We produced a contaminating training: Freely accessible online training
course with ; online exchange forum, to share and help each other, when
training on free of charge these subjects; online and in real life
hangouts to extend this sharing and serve local projects on these
subjects, all content items being also reusable to derive and build
other ressources. Hybrid : Because online ressources are designed to
derive in situ activities. Performative : Because students are taught to
be their own teacher, while helping each other. Performative, in the
sense that an adult benefits from this training and then in his family
or in his business, association, structure shares what he has discovered
with his or her children or the seniors, or the other way round. Part of
the training exercises is to be able to transmit what has been learned.

With respect to other offers in the field [1], the contents are less
technical (e.g., machine learning programming in Python is proposed only
as an extension), but not only a verbal introduction, while effective
activities, including unplugged activities (i.e., without a computer
using low-tech everyday tools), are proposed to really understand
how-it-works. We not only talk about AI, we make people manipulate.

Contents allow us to gain a first understanding of what AI means and
what it is not, understand the principles of machine learning and the
crucial role played by data, taking into account the societal issues of
AI. Learners are invited to question themself, beyond preconceived
ideas, and really understand the ground of AI; perform activities and
manipulate AI programs to build their own vision; acquire a minimal
scientific and technical culture (concepts, history of humans and
ideas). As an outcome they are able to discuss the subject, question
applications, choose some framework to contribute to the development (or
not) of AI applications.

​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​

​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​

​ ​ ​ ​

​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​

​

​ ​ ​ ​

​ ​

3.

First results and Analysis

After one month of activity [results will be updated in the final
version], more than 10000 persons joined (35% female, 64% male, 1% not
binary) with about 300 persons done yet, more than 1000 persons enjoying
at least a part of this modular formation. They are mainly active (55%
on activity, 15% retired, 11% students, 8% job researcher), mostly with
university level (78% at least bachelors in any field, 10% PhD), but
rather beginners in the field (57% full beginners, 40% intermediate non
expert), working 10 to 20 hours in average (about 50% of the persons
spend from 2 up to 5 hours per week, during about 3 weeks, while 25%
spend less and 25% more), and above 90% of person having their
expectation satisfied (40% fully satisfied). Detailed results [will be]
available as supplementary material. On the forum, more than 1500
persons have been or are active while more than 3500 are reading the
about 200 discussions, more than half being on the course contents
(e.g., strong versus weak AI, symbolic versus numeric methods, societal
issues, …). More than 10 online hangouts of 30 to 200 persons have been
already organized by one of the 70 partners of the Class´Code project
[4], during this covid-19 confinement.

Qualitatively, beyond very nice and encouraging positive feedbacks,
through the constant evaluation of the course by the users, we are
invited to take several improvements into account : (i) extend the
existing formation with more operational tutorials, (ii) manage some
technical weakness because we integrate state of the art recent external
resources, some still to be consolidated, (iii) complete the existing
contents to better help the learner progression. And we will, since this
is a long term open course (probably more than 2 years). A few persons
did not find what they expected, either because they are not interested
in redoing activities with young person (on any age ;)) to better
understand or because they were looking for professional formation.

On our side, we are really delighted to participate on these
researcher-citizen exchanges and shares, with very interesting
questions, sometimes on crucial subjects, always moderated (no troll,
yet ;)). We are less happy about the fact we have mainly reached rather
highly educated persons, while we target popularisation. When a person
joins, the content is always considered as accessible, and the hard
point is to join. We hope that in real life hangouts and also community
approaches will help, and work on this aspect [5,6].

4.  

Conclusion and Perspectives

We are proposing a “maker” approach to AI popularization between
technical formation allowing to use AI at work, such as [1], and more
superficial presentation of AI only in “words”.

Acknowledgements University Engineering and Technology all

. Class´Code partners

The

Digital Direction for Education of the French Ministry, the French

Digital

, Microsoft,

EducAzur

, La

, Compagnie du Code

LINE laboratory

, and

References

1.  A free online introduction to artificial intelligence for
    non-experts,

https://www.elementsofai.com

, last accessed

2020/05/31

2.  Mariais, C., Roche, D., Farhi, L., Barnabé, S., Cruchon, S., de
    Quatrebarbes, S., Viéville, T. EIAH’19 Wokshop : Apprentissage de la
    pensée informatique de la maternelle à l’Université : retours
    d’expériences et passage à l’échelle, Paris, France (2019)

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02145466v2

3.  

    Atlan, C., Archambault, J.P., Banus, O., Bardeau, F., Blandeau, A. et al.. Apprentissage de la pensée informatique
        de la formation des enseignant·e·s à la formation de tou·te·s
        les citoyen·ne·s. EIAH’19 Wokshop - Apprentissage de la pensée
        informatique de la maternelle à l’Université : retours
        d’expériences et passage à l’échelle, Paris, France (2019) The
        Class´Code

4.  

5.  Corieri, P., Romero, M., Massart, T., Goletti, O., Mens, K., et al..
    Enjeux dans la création d’une communauté

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02145480v1

, last accessed 2020/05/31

online reusable formation

https://classcode.fr/iai

https://classcode.fr

d’enseignants engagés dans l’apprentissage de l’informatique. Didapro 8
- DidaSTIC - Colloques francophones de didactique de l’informatique,
Lille, France (2020)

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02426274v1

6.  Romero, M., Lefèvre, S.-C., Viéville, T. When a Master of Sciences
    on EdTech becomes an International

Community. ERCIM News, (2020)

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02418510v1

​ ​ ​

​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​

​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​


