A System-Level Model of Noradrenergic Function Maxime Carrere, Frédéric
Alexandre

To cite this version:

Maxime Carrere, Frédéric Alexandre. A System-Level Model of
Noradrenergic Function. 25th Inter- national Conference on Artificial
Neural Networks (ICANN), Sep 2016, Barcelona, Spain. pp.214 - 221,
￿10.1007/978-3-319-44778-0_25￿. ￿hal-01401890￿

HAL Id: hal-01401890

https://inria.hal.science/hal-01401890

Submitted on 23 Nov 2016

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

A System-level Model of Noradrenergic function

Maxime Carrere1,2,3 and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre2,1,3

1LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, UMR 5800, Talence,
France 2Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, 200 Avenue de la Vieille Tour, 33405
Talence, France 3IMN, Universit´e de Bordeaux, CNRS, UMR 5293, Bordeaux,
France frederic.alexandre@inria.fr

Abstract. Neuromodulation is an interesting way to display diﬀerent
modes of functioning in a complex network. The eﬀect of Noradrenaline
has often been related to the exploration/exploitation trade-oﬀ and im-
plemented in models by modulation of the gain of activation function. In
this paper, we show that this mechanism is not suﬃcient for system-level
networks and propose another way to implement it, exploiting reported
inhibition of a striatal region by Noradrenaline. We describe here the
corresponding model and report its performances in a reversal task.

Keywords: Neuromodulation, bio-inspiration, decision making

1

Introduction

In neuromodulation, a principle of neural activation already observed in
crus- tacea [5], a small set of neurons projects to most regions of the
brain and can modify their functioning and learning modes by acting on
the intrinsic properties of neurons and on the synaptic weights.
Neuromodulators have been popular- ized in the modeling domain by a
paper by K. Doya [7], proposing how diﬀerent phases of reinforcement
learning might be implemented by global signals rep- resenting such
neuromodulators, where “dopamine signals the error in reward prediction,
serotonin controls the time scale of reward prediction, noradrenaline
controls the randomness in action selection, and acetylcholine controls
the speed of memory update” (quoted from [7]).

Concerning dopamine [12] and acetylcholine [13], the role of these
neuro- modulators has been deﬁned more precisely, relying on
experimental data and on more precise or more biologically informed
models. In this paper, we propose to revisit the role of noradrenaline
(or norepinephrine, NE) and particularly of its eﬀects on other brain
regions. Whereas an excitatory attentional eﬀect is generally reported
for NE, we mention here a new inhibitory eﬀect on a speciﬁc striatal
region and explain why, in the brain and also in models, this additional
eﬀect is important for the global dynamics of the network. In the next
sections, we introduce more precisely some information about
noradrenaline and the way it is presently integrated in models,
including data and results that will be im- portant for our model that
is subsequently presented together with simulation results.

2

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

2 The noradrenergic system

NE originates mainly from the Locus Coeruleus (LC), a brainstem nucleus
[4]. One acknowledged role of NE is to modify sensory processing in the
thalamus and the cortex [15, 16], depending on the level of arousal and
attention required by the external situation, proposed to be encoded by
the tonic levels of NE [4]. At low level, the animal is at rest
(sleeping or grooming). A highly salient stimulus (for example reliably
announcing a reward) is going to increase tonic NE level and trigger
phasic NE burst to precisely focus attentional processing on that
stimulus and resist to distractors. The highest tonic levels of NE are
observed when the conditions are no longer predictable (for example in
unknown or changing environments) and require to explore among possible
relevant stimuli to extract new contingencies [2].

This general view relating the level of NE to the level of arousal is
consis- tent with its often mentioned implication in choosing between
exploitation and exploration (with higher levels) of sensory criteria to
select actions [2]. This is also consistent with the reported
implication of NE during reversal [1] when a sensory criterion to
predict a reward becomes suddenly invalid and requires to look for
another predictive sensory criterion. This has been termed unexpected
uncertainty in [17], in contrast to expected uncertainty, corresponding
to the stochasticity of the criterion and encoded by another
neuromodulator, acetyl- choline, and requiring only patience and not
reconsideration of the criterion.

Going deeper in the description of LC aﬀerents and eﬀerents can allow
for a more precise interpretation of the role of NE, based on
information available in LC to decide on the release of NE and the
nature of NE actions in LC targets. Inputs to LC are of three kinds. Low
level signals from peripheral centres give basic information about level
of arousal from the sympathetic system and about salient sensory inputs
from the oculomotor system [4]. More elaborated elements of information
are sent by the central nucleus of the amygdala and the medial
prefrontal cortex towards LC [16]. They are generally believed to
contribute to evaluate the nature of the present situation, and
correspond to information like reward history or response conﬂicts and
errors [2]. Other noteworthy inputs to LC are from other neuromodulatory
centres which reciprocally inﬂuence LC [16]. LC projects to most brain
regions and more heavily to attentional struc- tures like the parietal
sensory cortex, where NE can enhance evoked activity [3]. Importantly,
the basal ganglia is the only cerebral structure not receiving
projections from LC, except for the shell region of the nucleus
accumbens, where NE is reported to have an inhibitory eﬀect [11].

3 Modeling the role of noradrenaline

In addition to [7, 17] other modeling papers have proposed to implement
NE mechanisms. McClure and colleagues [10] propose that the level of NE
is esti- mated by an evaluation function depending on the reward rate
(corresponding to

Model of Noradrenergic function

3

input of the orbitofrontal cortex to LC) and measures of response
conﬂict (cor- responding to input of the anterior cingulate cortex, ACC,
to LC), computed from two windows of long term and short term history of
activity.

The model by Aston Jones and colleagues [2] proposes a mechanism im-
plementing the trade-oﬀ between exploration and exploitation, with the
Drift Diﬀusion Model (DDM). This model can be applied for tasks with two
choices with two units acting as accumulators, integrating over time
possibly noisy sig- nals favoring each choice and responding when the
diﬀerence of levels exceeds a threshold. Interestingly, DDM has been
originally proposed to reproduce reac- tion times and error rates in
decision making processes but appears to explain well neuronal responses
recorded during such processes. In the model, the value of the threshold
is of course an important parameter, but also the gain of ac- cumulator
integration that can be modiﬁed to reach the threshold at diﬀerent
speeds. This simple model, which can be equivalently implemented with
units in mutual inhibition, has been shown to be a good approximation of
the opti- mal decision [6] but remains limited to two-alternative
choices. It has also been shown to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio in
the diﬀerence between the input signals and, when this ratio changes,
[6] shows that the gain of the units (or their mutually inhibiting
strength) must be modiﬁed accordingly.

It is proposed in [2] that, when tonic NE is released (in a situation
identiﬁed as unexpected uncertainty), the gain of the sensory units will
increase and this will facilitate random activation of sensory neurons
and accordingly exploration. Nevertheless, we have observed some
limitations, trying to apply DDM to act not only on a sensory layer of
units representing candidate stimuli (as it is the case in [2, 6]) but
on the sensory part of a neural network learning to associate a
representation of the value of stimuli to the best response, presented
in [8] as an implementation of decision making in the brain.

In the [8] network, associations have been learned between sensory
neurons and neurons triggering the actions. Even if by NE gain increase
a new stimulus is more activated, associative weights might compensate
and trigger the habitual action. To tell it diﬀerently, an excitatory
noise in the sensory layer does not necessarily trigger motor
exploration.

4 Our model

We have mentioned above a biological fact that has not yet been
exploited in models, the inhibitory eﬀect of NE in the shell [11]. In
fact, the shell is a striatal region known to participate in the
evaluation of the value of stimuli in the orbito- fontal cortex which
can in turn activate motor responses toward stimuli. We can consequently
explore another alternative of NE neuromodulation eﬀect, where its
action in the shell can inhibit previously learned sensorimotor
associations. Our model uses the DANA library for neuronal
representation and compu- tation [14]. It extends the model presented in
[8] by studying the eﬀect of explo- ration and tonic NE on it. All the
code for the model and parameters are open-

4

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

source and available online at
https://github.com/carreremax/basal-ganglia-ne. We will only describe
and discuss here changes made from the Guthrie model.

Fig. 1. Main features of our model compared to [8]. ST-PRED and LT-PRED
are respectively short-term predictor and long-term predictor which
predict reward arrival as the average reward from a long and short
amount of trials. Each prediction inhibits the excitatory input of the
other in ACC, resulting in ACC activation and NE release in LC only in
case of discrepancy between the predictions, ie. in case of unexpected
uncertainty. NE release is then used to trigger exploration in [8], by
facilitation of cortical excitation and inhibition of striatal inputs.

The level of NE is computed as the diﬀerence (or conﬂict) between a slow

and a fast predictor as follows:

The noradrenaline system receives inputs from short and long-term reward
predictors, as shown in ﬁgure 1. Short and long-term predictors are
computed as the average reward on the respectively n st trials and n lt
trials last trials.

lt prediction = (

(cid:88)

k∈n lt trials

rewardk)/n lt trials

st prediction = (

(cid:88)

k∈n st trials with rewardk the reward received at trial k.

rewardk)/n st trials

These rewards are respectively sent as inputs to two ACC units computing

the conﬂict between the two predictions, ne s and ne l:

Similarly :

dUne s dt

dUne l dt

= τ ∗ (−Une s + st prediction − lt prediction)

= τ ∗ (−Une l + lt prediction − st prediction)

So the long-term prediction is inhibiting the ne s, and the short-term
one is in- hibiting ne l. The level of NE release, ne, is then taken as
the sum of nes and nel activities. As a result, if both old and recent
predictions are not predicting any

Short-term reward predictionST-PREDGuthrie’s modelSensory
loopAssociative and motor loopsActionexcitatory eectinhibitory
eectNoradrenalinergic systemExcitatory connectionInhibitory
connectionIndirect connection (through other areas)Model of
Noradrenergic function

5

reward, neither nes nor nel activities are strong, and then NE
concentration is low. Symmetrically, if both systems are predicting
rewards, the two predictions will inhibit the projections of each other,
thus resulting in a low NE release. However, if only one system is
predicting a reward, ie if the prediction follow- ing recent history is
diﬀerent from the prediction based on long history, the corresponding NE
population will have a strong, non-inhibited activation, thus triggering
a high level of NE release, corresponding to the fact that the reward
contingency has recently changed.

Consistent with previous models, NE eﬀect at the cortical level is an
excita-

tory gain :

dVctx dt

= f (Uctx ∗ (1 + ne) ∗ (1 + noise))

where Vctx and Uctx are respectively the ﬁring rate and membrane
potential of cortical neurons, f and noise respectively the sigmoid
function and activation noise used in [8]. NE inhibitory eﬀect is an
original mechanism added in our model, and impacts the output gain of
projection from cortex to shell :

gain = g ctx cog str cog ∗ ne modulation

with g ctx cog str cog the constant gain between cortex and striatum in
the sensory loop, and ne modulation the modulatory eﬀect of NE.

ne modulation = max(0.5, 1 − ne ef f iciency ∗ ne)

NE modulatory eﬀect is limited to halving excitatory projections from
cortex to shell, consistent with the eﬀect of NE observed in [11]. ne ef
f iciency is a constant set to 0.8, so that only maximum values of ne
will provoke a minimum value of ne modulation.

Architectural parameters

Meaning Initial values of critic’s predictions Learning rate of the
critic learning rate for long term potentiation learning rate for long
term depression

Parameter init critic α critic α LT P α LT D g ctx cog str cog gain from
cognitive cortex to cognitive striatum g ctx cog str ass gain from
cognitive cortex to associative striatum g ne exc g ne inh n st trials n
lt trials

gain of excitatory projections in NE populations gain of inhibitory
projections in NE populations Number of trials taken into account for
the short-term predictor 3 Number of trials taken into account for the
long-term predictor 30

Value 0.25 0.2 0.0001 0.00005 1.2 0.3 1.0 -1.0

Fig. 2. Description and values of the parameters added or modiﬁed
compared to [8].

One of the main problems with unexpected uncertainty-based exploration
is the learning rate of the model. If the learning speed of the network
is too slow,

6

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

the network will perform exploration, but will not be able to learn
based on this exploration. At the opposite, if the learning is fast
enough to learn from a few trials of exploration, it may converge too
quickly, which can lead to sub-optimal choice or stability issues. To
address this problem, we modiﬁed the learning rate of the critic module
in the Guthrie’s model, from previously 0.025 to 0.2, so that the critic
could learn based on exploration, and we added critics’ prediction as a
sensory input of the network. Consequently, exploration helps the critic
to learn insights of the values of alternative strategies, and such
values are taken into account in the sensory loop, which in turn helps
the network to choose the relevant alternative strategies, and learn
from it.

5 Experiments

In order to analyze NE eﬀects in the cortex and the shell, together with
the switch between exploration and exploitation, we tested our model on
reversal learning. At each trial, two sensory CS are simultaneously
presented to the network, on two random positions during 2500ms and the
network has to perform an action toward one of the CS. As soon as the
model performs an action, reward is distributed accordingly to the
reward probability of the chosen CS. If no CS is selected after the
2500ms of presentation, the network will not receive any reward. Then
neural activities go down to their initial values, and we proceed to the
next trial. The acquisition phase consists in 40 trials, in order to
perform over-training and to allow habit formation. In each trial, one
CS is systematically rewarded while the other is not. During the
reversal, which lasts for 40 trials, reward rates for each CS are
switched, so the network has to detect the change in reward
contingencies and to switch to the other CS.

In ﬁg.3, we report the average performance and decision time on 100
reversal experiments with and without NE release. Each experiment is
performed with a “naive” model. The model correctly learns to choose the
best rewarded CS during the exploration and reversal phases. However, NE
release allows to per- form random exploration, and to gradually learn
from this exploration, resulting in a faster convergence than networks
without exploration (ﬁg.3.A). In addition NE release also increases the
decision time of the model during the ﬁrst trials of reversal (ﬁg.3.B).
This is in accordance with [9] results, showing that animals with NE
depletion respond with greater rapidity when perseverating. Fig.3.C
shows the release of noradrenaline during trials, which is indeed
proportional to unexpected uncertainty, with a peak at the reversal
onset.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have reported a model and associated experiments that
illus- trate the interest of neuromodulation, as a way to modulate
existing networks, instead of complexifying their architecture. This is
particularly the case for no- radrenaline, and its conﬁrmed role in the
trade-oﬀ between exploration and exploitation. As illustrated in our
experiments, NE-based exploration increases

Model of Noradrenergic function

7

Fig. 3. Reversal experiments for our decision making model with NE
eﬀects (blue) or without NE eﬀects (red). Each curve is the average of
100 experiments performed each time with a “naive” model. Surrounding
shaded areas indicate the standard deviation for each curve. (A) Average
performance by trials. Both NE and non-NE models are able to acquire CS
values and to learn reversal. Exploration allows NE model to detect
quicker the change in reward contingency, and to correctly perform
faster than the non- NE one. (B) Average convergence time. During the
ﬁrst trials of reversal, exploration by inhibition of the striatum
induces a larger response time for NE model. (C) Average release of NE.
NE release is important at the beginning of exploration, and larger
during the ﬁrst trials of reversal. It correlates with unexpected
uncertainty.

the convergence speed of a decision network in an unexpected situation,
which is a decisive adaptive property for animals and other autonomous
systems.

We have pointed out that another solution for NE-based exploration can
be the inhibition of learnt rules rather than the excitation of the
sensory gain, and have shown a biologically-inspired, neuronal
implementation of it, using reported NE eﬀect in the shell [11]. Its
excitatory eﬀect in the cortex, widely used in other models, is still
present here. Yet, simulation of the model with only striatal NE (not
reported here) still exhibits exploration, but with longer decision
time. We hypothetize here that because the task does not require
exploration of additional representation in the cortex, cortical NE is
not necessary for exploration. If the task needs discovery and creation
of adequate cortical representation, like for extra-dimensional shift,
it would need cortical NE. Another prediction to be tested in both
computational and experimental neuroscience is that inhibiting NE
release in the shell should both impede exploration and decrease the
decision time. These predictions are explored in ongoing work.

10203040506070800.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Performance1.000.581.000.40ReversalA1020304050607080100200300400500600700800900Response
time (ms)248.55455.46226.75427.75B1020304050607080Trial
number0.00.20.40.60.81.0NE release0.030.000.000.00C8

Maxime Carrere and Fr´ed´eric Alexandre

References

1.  Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., Kubiak, P.: Conditioned responses of
    monkey locus coeruleus neurons anticipate acquisition of
    discriminative behavior in a vigilance task. Neuroscience 80(3),
    697–715 (Jul 1997)

2.  Aston-Jones, G., Cohen, J.D.: An integrative theory of Locus
    Coeruleus- Norepinephrine function: Adaptive Gain and Optimal
    Performance. Annual Re- view of Neuroscience 28(1), 403–450 (2005)

3.  Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., Cohen, J.: Role of locus coeruleus
    in attention and

behavioral ﬂexibility. Biological Psychiatry 46(9), 1309–1320 (Nov 1999)

4.  Berridge, C.W., Waterhouse, B.D.: The locus coeruleus-noradrenergic
    system: modulation of behavioral state and state-dependent cognitive
    processes. Brain Re- search Reviews 42(1), 33–84 (2003)

5.  Bouret, S., Sara, S.J.: Network reset: a simpliﬁed overarching
    theory of locus coeruleus noradrenaline function. Trends in
    Neurosciences 28(11), 574–582 (2005)

6.  Brown, E., Gao, J., Holmes, P., Bogacz, R., Gilzenrat, M., Cohen,
    J.D.: Simple Neural Networks that optimize decisions. Int. J.
    Bifurcation Chaos 15(03), 803–826 (Mar 2005),
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/s0218127405012478

7.  Doya, K.: Metalearning and neuromodulation. Neural Networks 15(4-6),
    495–506

(Jun 2002), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0893-6080(02)00044-8

8.  Guthrie, M., Leblois, A., Garenne, A., Boraud, T.: Interaction
    between cognitive and motor cortico-basal ganglia loops during
    decision making: a computational study. Journal of Neurophysiology
    109(12), 3025–3040 (Jun 2013)

9.  Mason, S.T., Iversen, S.D.: An investigation of the role of cortical
    and cerebellar noradrenaline in associative motor learning in the
    rat. Brain Research 134(3), 513– 527 (Oct 1977),
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(77)90826-5

10. McClure, S., Gilzenrat, M., Cohen, J.: An exploration-exploitation
    model based on norepinepherine and dopamine activity. In: Weiss, Y.,
    Sch¨olkopf, B., Platt, J. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information
    Processing Systems 18, pp. 867–874. MIT Press (2006),
    http://www.csbmb.princeton.edu/~{}smcclure/pdf/MGC\_NIPS.pdf

11. Nicola, S.M., Malenka, R.C.: Modulation of synaptic transmission by
    dopamine and norepinephrine in ventral but not dorsal striatum.
    Journal of neurophysiology 79(4), 1768–1776 (Apr 1998),
    http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9535946

12. O’Reilly, R.C., Frank, M.J., Hazy, T.E., Watz, B.: PVLV: The primary
    value and learned value Pavlovian learning algorithm. Behavioral
    neuroscience 121(1), 31–49 (Feb 2007),
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0735-7044.121.1.31

13. Pauli, W.M., O’Reilly, R.C.: Attentional control of associative
    learning–a possible role of the central cholinergic system. Brain
    Research 1202, 43–53 (Apr 2008)

14. Rougier, N.P., Fix, J.: DANA: Distributed (asynchronous) Numerical
    and Adaptive modelling framework. Network: Computation in Neural
    Systems 23(4), 237–253 (Dec 2012)

15. Sadacca, B.F., Wikenheiser, A.M., Schoenbaum, G.: Toward a
    theoretical role for tonic norepinephrine in the orbitofrontal
    cortex in facilitating ﬂexible learning. Neuroscience (Apr 2016)

16. Sara, S.J., Bouret, S.: Orienting and Reorienting: The Locus
    Coeruleus Mediates

Cognition through Arousal. Neuron 76(1), 130–141 (Oct 2012)

17. Yu, A.J., Dayan, P.: Uncertainty, Neuromodulation, and Attention.
    Neuron 46(4)

(2005) 


