Knowledge Recovery for Continental-Scale Mineral Exploration by Neural
Networks Laurent Bougrain, Maria Gonzalez, Vincent Bouchot, Daniel
Cassard, Andor

Lips, Frédéric Alexandre, Gilbert Stein

To cite this version:

Laurent Bougrain, Maria Gonzalez, Vincent Bouchot, Daniel Cassard, Andor
Lips, et al.. Knowledge Recovery for Continental-Scale Mineral
Exploration by Neural Networks. Natural Resources Research, 2003, 12
(3), pp.173-181. ￿10.1023/A:1025123920475￿. ￿inria-00099699￿

HAL Id: inria-00099699

https://inria.hal.science/inria-00099699

Submitted on 18 Dec 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and
dissemination of sci- entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or private research
centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est destinée au dépôt et à la
diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou
non, émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français
ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou privés.

Knowledge Recovery for Continental-Scale Mineral Exploration by Neural
Networks

Laurent Bougrain,1 Maria Gonzalez,2 Vincent Bouchot,2 Daniel Cassard,2
Andor L. W. Lips,2 Fr ´ed ´eric Alexandre,1 and Gilbert Stein2

This study is concerned with understanding of the formation of ore
deposits (precious and base metals) and contributes to the exploration
and discovery of new occurrences using artiﬁcial neural networks. From
the different digital data sets available in BRGM’s GIS Andes (a
comprehensive metallogenic continental-scale Geographic Information
System) 25 attributes are identiﬁed as known factors or potential
factors controlling the formation of gold deposits in the Andes
Cordillera. Various multilayer perceptrons were applied to discriminate
possible ore deposits from barren sites. Subsequently, because artiﬁcial
neural networks can be used to construct a revised model for knowledge
extraction, the optimal brain damage algorithm by LeCun was applied to
order the 25 attributes by their relevance to the classiﬁcation. The
approach demonstrates how neural networks can be used efﬁciently in a
practical problem of mineral exploration, where general domain knowledge
alone is insufﬁcient to satisfactorily model the potential controls on
deposit formation using the available information in continent-scale
information systems.

KEY WORDS: Artiﬁcial neural networks, variable selection, pruning
algorithm, geographic information system, metallogenic research.

INTRODUCTION

In the last ﬁve years, continent-scale informa- tion systems have been
constructed by BRGM to serve metallogenic and environmental research
(GIS Andes, (Cassard, 2000); GIS Africa, (Milesi and others, 2001); GIS
Central Europe, (Cassard and others, 2001); GIS Urals, Leistel and
others, in press). These information systems are composed of spatially
referenced geographical, geological, and mineral- deposit thematic
layers, and their respective attribute data (see Fig. 1). They are used
primarily to estab- lish insights in the region’s mineral potential, its
past and future mining activities, and its related environ- mental
vulnerability. The information systems can be

1 LORIA/INRIA Lorraine,

scien- tiﬁque, BP 239, 54506 Vandœure-l `es-Nancy, France, e-mail:
bougrain@loria.fr.

CORTEX,

Campus

2 BRGM, Mineral Resources Division, BP 6009, 45060 Orl ´eans

cedex02, France; e-mail: v.bouchot@brgm.fr.

exploited further to derive new rules between differ- ent attributes in
relation to mineral deposit formation and the spatial distributions of
the deposits. Differ- ent methods are applied to deﬁne a region’s
mineral potential, to assign weights to the different attributes, and to
derive new rules. The methods range from data- driven approaches to
knowledge-driven approaches and also involve hybrid approaches.

MINERAL-POTENTIAL MAPPING

Mineral-potential mapping subdivides areas ac- cording to metal or
mineral favorability (probabil- ity of deposit) and may be carried out
in com- mercial exploration programs or in governmen- tal
mineral-resource assessments. The ability of a Geographic Information
System to combine spa- tial data from different sources contributes
signiﬁ- cantly to identifying spatial associations of the data, and to
using models for analysis and prediction of

1

Figure 1. Composite “Metallogenic” layer with its constituent layers:
geology (polygons), mines (points), and faults (lines), and related
attributes tables.

the spatial phenomena (Bonham-Carter, Agterberg and Wright, 1989;
Bonham-Carter, 1994; Burrough and McDonnell, 1998). The dedication of a
GIS to mineral-potential mapping is classically a three-step approach
(Bonham-Carter, 1994; Knox-Robinson and Wyborn, 1997): (i) data
identiﬁcation and orga- nization, (ii) data quantiﬁcation and
processing, and (iii) data integration and modeling. The evolutions of
Data Mining and Artiﬁcial Neural Networking tech- niques allow an
alternative approach. The latter rep- resents an adaptive computing
system that can learn from the data in order to conduct speciﬁc tasks.
Un- like the conventional three-step approach, a neural network can
analyze all data simultaneously.

In the past decade, mineral-potential mapping using a GIS has been
applied by various research groups and involved different ore deposit
models. Models for predicting mineral potential, based on statistical
relationships or on heuristic relationships, are examples of empirical
models in contrast to con- ceptual models (Knox-Robinson and Wyborn,
1997). The assignments of weights to the different attributes can either
be carried out using statistical criteria, or the weights can be
estimated on the basis of ex- pert opinion. The approaches can be
subdivided into data-driven and knowledge-driven models (Bonham- Carter,
1994; Harris and others, 2001). In data-driven modeling, the various
input maps are combined using

2

methods such as logistic regression, weights of evi- dence, or neural
networks. Data-driven approaches require that “a prior” knowledge exists
in the form of known mineral deposits or occurrences and barren ar- eas
in the study area. Knowledge-driven approaches, which rely on the
geologist to weight the importance of different data layers, may include
the use of fuzzy logic, Bayesian probability and Dempster-Shafer be-
lief theory (Bonham-Carter, 1994). Conceptual min- eral deposit models,
containing all typical character- istics of a certain type of deposit,
may contribute in data selection and data modeling, in helping to decide
which features to enhance and extract as evidence, and in helping to
decide how to weigh the relative importance of evidence.

The principal advantages of weights of evidence modeling is that the
method is well deﬁned, repro- ducible, objective (avoids the subjective
choice of weighting factors), and provides a quantitative mea- sure of
conﬁdence (Raines, 1999). Fuzzy sets (Zadeh, 1965) have been introduced
to handle with inex- act concepts in a deﬁnable way (e.g. Burrough and
McDonnell, 1998). Fuzzy set theory has been applied to mineral
exploration (e.g., An, Moon, and Rencz, 1991) demonstrating that the
method can represent adequately and manipulate imprecise and incomplete
information. Data mining is deﬁned as a process of ex- tracting implicit
unknown and potentially useful data from a GIS (Salleb and Vrain, 2000).
Similar to other statistical approaches, a neural network requires the
construction of a training set that is representative of both deposits
and nondeposits in order to allow dis- crimination between the two
modalities.

NEURAL NETWORKS APPLIED TO GIS ANDES

GIS Andes, A Continental-Scale GIS

GIS Andes is a homogeneous information sys- tem of the entire Andes
Cordillera, covering an area of 3.83 million km2 and extending for some
8,500 km from the Guajira Peninsula (northern Colombia) to Cape Horn
(Tierra del Fuego). Conceived as a tool for both the mining sector,
where it is an aid to minerals exploration and development, and the
academic sec- tor where it is an aid to developing new metallogenic
models, GIS Andes is based on original syntheses and compilations
(Cassard, 1999).

The following different layers of the system are available and can be
combined in any way that the

user sees ﬁt:

➢ Geographic: a geographic base (DCW ➢ DEM: digital elevation models
with a struc-

);

tural analysis of the topography; Imagery: SPOT 4 VEGETATION

images;

➢ Geological synthesis: geological map of the

Andes at 1:2,000,000 scale;

➢ Geologic map coverage: more than 1,100 geo-

referenced maps; Seismic: more than 50,000 seismic records, with
modeling of the subduction zone (for example, Eg. 2);

➢ Volcanic: data on Holocene volcanism; ➢ Gravimetric: the Bouguer
anomaly calcula- tion; isostatic correction and corresponding residual
anomalies; vertical gradient calcula- tion and structural analysis;
gravity modeling of the Nazca plate;

➢ Heat ﬂow: a base with oceanic and continental

data;

➢ Geochemistry: a database containing 3,935

whole-rock analyses;

➢ Ore deposits:

linked to a Database under and using a new metallogenic lexicon; ➢
Mineralogy, ﬂuid inclusions, isotopes: data on

Access

the main ore deposits of the Cordillera.

The data used by the artiﬁcial neural networks in

this study were extracted from these data layers.

Attributes and classes

The present study included an analysis of the GIS Andes data that
enabled a speciﬁc model to be com- piled for recent Andean ore deposits
(15 to 2 Ma) linked to the recent evolution of the subduction zone (Fig.
2) that underlies the entire cordillera and may be a continental-scale
ore localizing phenomenon. This speciﬁc model concerns the development
of highly prospected ore deposits (Au, Ag, Cu . . . ) belonging to
epithermal-porphyry systems related to active mar- gins. The model
revealed a set of attributes considered to have, more or less, a
relationship to the spatial and temporal distribution of the recent
epithermal- porphyry Andean deposits.

The main attributes retained were:

• Type and age of the country rock hosting the

deposits,

• Proximity of the deposit to a regional fault dis-

tinguished by its strike,

3

(cid:210) ➢ (cid:210) ➢ (cid:210) • Density and focal depth of
earthquakes imme-

diately below the deposit,

• Proximity of active volcanoes (indicative of ac-

tive hydrothermal systems),

• Geometry of the subduction zone: depth of subducted plate below the
ore deposit, dip of the subduction zone immediately below the de- posit,
distance to the subduction trench,

• Position (longitude, latitude, altitude) of the

deposit.

To train the network optimally, two variables were selected for the
study; that is, “deposit” and “barren”.

Under the “deposit” variable, a total of 398 re- cent (2 to 15 Ma)
Andean Au, Ag, Cu, Mo, Sb, Hg, Pb, and Zn -bearing deposits
(epithermal-porphyry type), documented as points, were extracted from
GIS Andes.

The “barren” database contains 243 entries. Al- though the notion of
“barren site or nondeposit” has no geological meaning or signiﬁcance as
such, it is nevertheless of extreme importance to an opti-

mal learning exercise of the network. For a correct “learning,” the
neural network needs to be supplied with a database of examples that are
not deposits and that, by their opposition or contrast to deposits, en-
able the network to adapt its weight to the task of discriminating a
deposit from a nondeposit. If a de- posit covers about 1 km2 on average,
then any ran- domly selected 1 km2 cell in the study area has a high
probability of belonging to the barren population because known deposits
represent 398/2.307 million km2 or about 0.017% of possible cells. The
remain- ing 99.983% of the cells actually represent barren ar- eas,
areas possibly containing “not well deﬁned” (age and/or type) deposits
and occurrences not taken into account in this study, and a small
proportion of undis- covered deposits. Thus, the method adopted to
create the barren database consisted in selecting arbitrary points from
the areas well outside the mining districts and where, as far as known,
no deposits have been discovered. Because these points were
georeferenced, their values relative to the retained attributes could be
obtained by crossing the different layers of GIS Andes.

Figure 2. Seismicity layer of GIS Andes and modeling of subduction zone.

4

In the end, the data set comprises 641 examples (398
epithermal-porphyry deposits and 243 barren sites) available for the
neural network’s learning phase.

Classiﬁcation

Artiﬁcial neural networks constitute good tools for this type of
computational modeling. Artiﬁcial neural networks, such as multilayer
perceptrons, can learn how to classify patterns described by a set of
at- tributes into different classes using a set of examples as
supervised learning. In this situation, the correct class is given and a
function calculates the difference or error between the desired class
and the estimate of the network. Then a learning algorithm, for example
the back-propagation algorithm, uses this difference to modify the
weights of the network with the aim of reducing the error. This process
continues until all of the training data have been learned by the
network. A part of the database should be used to learn the model
(learning set) and the other part should be used to test its performance
in a generalization test set (i.e. how the network classiﬁes patterns it
has never seen during the learning stage). In this way, it is possible
to handle the risk of overtraining of the network. This phenomenon
occurs when the number of weights is too large compared to the number of
learning exam- ples that allows the network to learn idiosyncrasies of
the examples without learning the general model that really links the
inputs to the outputs. Results obtained by the network can ﬂuctuate with
different selected learning examples and the size of the leaning set. To
improve the conﬁdence in the results, it is mandatory to test the
performance of the network using different learning sets. The
cross-validation is a special situation of this procedure. The database
is split up into n sub- sets. Each subset is used as a test set, the
other ones are gathered into the learning set. Finally, the average of
the results is used as a measure of the performance of the model.

For a n-classiﬁcation task by artiﬁcial neural net- works, the target
class should be coded in a n-binary output vector with a value of 1 for
the class index and 0 for the others. Using the Gibbs’ activation
function [Eq. (1)], also termed the softmax function, the outputs of the
network predict the a posteriori probabilities that a pattern (sample)
belongs to each class.

p(kj |x) =

ea j P j ea j

(1) 

where k j is the class identiﬁed by the output neu- ron j, j ∈ [1, n]
and aj is the potential (i.e. the input) of this neuron.

Various multilayer perceptrons were applied with 25 input variables, one
hidden layer and 2 output units using a softmax function to predict the
a posteri- ori probability that a new site belongs to the “deposit” or
to the “barren” class.

The ﬁnal objective to be attained was twofold:

(1) Improve and quantify the established “deposit” model, after ranking
    the input attributes on the neural network;

(2) Prepare intermediate-term predictive min- eral maps once the network
    had completed its learning.

Automatic attribute selection

This real-world problem is so complex that, at the moment, the general
domain knowledge does not allow one to understand fully or predict ore
deposit formation. Good performances obtained by artiﬁcial neural
networks can lead us to extract additional knowledge which had not yet
been incorporated in existing ore deposit models. With the aim of
reducing the size of the model and extracting knowledge about which
attributes to use, we used a pruning method (Reed, 1993; Cibas and
others, 1996). The operating procedure of the pruning method is to
remove connec- tions or neurons, or both, which have less inﬂuence on
the system answer. The goals to reach are many. From a performance point
of view, reducing the number of variables (weights) reduces the chances
of overtrain- ing as generalization performance is improved. The size of
the model is adapted to the complexity of the task to be modeled. From
an implementation point of view, the smaller the model is, the faster it
will operate. Finally, from a knowledge extraction point of view,
removing connections allows one to extract rules and removing input
units allowing selection of the most useful attributes. According to the
goal and the method, the removing process can be applied to a
connection, a hidden unit or an input unit. The idea common to many
pruning methods is to build an ap- proximation of the error surface in
the neighborhood of a local minimum by a Taylor expansion [Eq. (2)] to
study the variation resulting from a removed weight.

± E = X

i

∂ E ∂wi

± wi +

1 2

X i

X j

∂ 2 E ∂wi ∂w j

± wi ± w j

+O(k± Wk3)

(2) 

5

where E is the error of the neural network, W is the vector containing
the weights and wi is one speciﬁc weight.

Some assumption are made to simplify the com- putation. First, the
weight variation is ﬁxed to ob- tain the suppression of the weight
inﬂuence, ± wi = −wi . We assume that after learning we are in a local
minimum, so ∀i∂ E/∂wi = 0. We assume that around this minimum, the error
surface is approximately quadratic, so O(k± Wk3) are insigniﬁcant terms.
In these conditions, Eq. (3) contains terms with second order
derivatives only, which are, by deﬁnition, the coefﬁcients of the
Hessian matrix H:

± E =

1 2 X

i

X j

∂ 2 E ∂wi ∂w j

wi w j

(3) 

The computational complexity is quadratic ac- cording to the number of
weights. Therefore, a net- work with one thousand weights needs to
compute one million terms at each iteration.

Le Cun, Denker, and Solla (1990) have suggested assuming that the
Hessian matrix is diagonal to reduce the number of derivatives to
compute. That amounts to making the assumption that the error variation
that occurs when several connections are removed is equal to the sum of
the error variations resulting from each being removed. Then:

± E =

1 2 X

i

∂ 2 E ∂wi ∂wi

(wi )2 = X i

± E(wi )

(4) 

To measure the inﬂuence of a weight, they deﬁne

the saliency, si of a connection wi as:

si = ± E(wi ) =

1 2

∂ 2 E ∂w2 i

(wi )2

(5) 

This method is a good compromise between sim-

plicity and efﬁciency.

Different strategies exist to decide how many connections to remove. The
best thing to do is to re- move only one connection at a time and then
to retrain the network before pruning again. But to go faster, we can
decide to remove a small ﬁxed number of connec- tion or, better, a small
percentage of the current num- ber of connections. In any instant, the
computations are available for a small variation around the actual
location.

6

RESULTS

Discrimination performances

Several multilayer perceptrons were used with 25 inputs, 2 outputs and
between 5 and 15 units in the hidden layer (Fig. 3).

The best performances in generalization for these different
architectures are similar to each other and can be resumed by the
following table (Table 1).

The results we obtain are metal dependant. The system is able to
determine correctly when a site is a gold deposit in 92%, a silver
deposit in 93%, and a copper deposit in 88 of the situations. When the
num- ber of examples in the database is too small, such as for antimony,
molybdenum or mercury (resp. 31, 25, and 5 examples), the performances
are less effective because from a statistical point of view the network
discovers it can obtain good performance just by clas- sifying all
unknowns as a “barren site” (e.g. it obtains only 31/641 = 5% error if
it classes all antimony sites as barren sites). Hence, the global
measure of misclas- siﬁed patterns should be considered to be complete
only with the information given by the confusion ma- trix, especially
when the number of patterns available for each class is unequal.

Variable selection

The optimal brain damage algorithm was applied to select the most
relevant attributes by reducing by 5% the number of connections after
each training (Fig. 4 illustrates many advantages of this approach). The
approach produced the following ordered

list of relevant attributes:

1.  Shortest distance to fault orientations be-

tween N 135◦E and N 157.5◦E;

2.  Earthquake density;
3.  Longitude;
4.  Presence of Cenozoic host rock;
5.  Shortest distance to an active volcano;
6.  Altitude;
7.  Presence of Mesozoic host rock;
8.  Shortest distance to fault orientations be-

tween N 0◦E and N 22.5◦E;

9.  Shortest distance to fault orientations be-

tween N 112.5◦E and N 135◦E.

This order presents the elements which occur to be most inﬂuential out
of the list of 25 different items in potentially controlling gold
mineralization:

Figure 3. Neural network architecture used to discriminate patterns of
two different classes (e.g. mineral deposits and barren sites or gold
deposits and no gold deposits) and described by 25 attributes using
supervised learning algorithm such as back-propagation. Hidden units
have hyperbolic tangent function as activation function and output units
have Gibbs’ activation function to predict a posteriori probabilities
that sample belongs to each class.

(i) variables 2 and 5 could underline the role of un- steady and
    long-lived crustal structures, at least since the Miocene; (ii)
    variables 3 and 6 probably are linked to the selection and location
    of barren sites that are

Table 1. Confusion matrix in generalization obtained by a multilayer
perceptron using all attributes and 10 units on the hidden layer. In
this example, test set contains 47 epithermal- porphyry deposits and 82
barren sites and it leads to 84% of correct classiﬁcation.

Known Deposit Class Barren

Predicted Class

Deposit

Barren

66% 6%

34% 94%

located preferentially outside the mineralized zones at lower altitudes;
(iii) variable 4 indicates that gold concentrations are controlled by
Tertiary magmatism which represents the preferred but nonexclusive host
rocks of gold mineralization (e.g. variable 7); and (iv) NW-striking
faults (variables 1 and 9) play an im- portant role as well as
approximately N-S (variable 8) structures.

The absence in this list of the “nature of host rock” variable
(e.g. volcanic lithologies), which ap- pears at the 15th position (out
of 25) illustrates a sur- prising result. However, despite the fact that
some at- tributes, such as the longitude or the altitude, would not seem
to be relevant, the application shows that the network can discriminate
easily a barren site

7

Figure 4. After pruning, many connections are removed. This reduces
complexity model. Hence, it is possible to handle overtraining problem.
Moreover, it is possible to extract knowledge; that is to select most
useful attributes, to identify some meaningful combinations, and to
extract rules (Remm and Alexandre, 2002).

from a mineralized one with a success rate of 84% (from Table 1).
Careful selection of barren sites, as discussed next remains vital to
the success of the network operation and is incorporated in current
research.

CONCLUSIONS

Data mining performances are dependent heav- ily on the database and the
efﬁciency of the applied data exploration routines. Selection of barren
sites

is a key factor in mineral-deposit exploration us- ing machine-learning
techniques. These sites should nearly resemble the deposit sites, in
location and data description. For example, barren sites can be selected
from deposits that do not contain the speciﬁc metal we are looking for.
Nevertheless, our approach demon- strates how neural networks can be
used efﬁciently in a practical problem of mineral exploration, where the
general domain knowledge alone is insufﬁcient to satisfactorily model
the possible controls on de- posit formation using the available
information in a continental-scale information system.

8

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The stylesheet was derived from those pro- for TALN’97 and posed by
Damien Genthial Pierre Zweigenbaum for TALN’98. GIS Andes was developed
within the context of two successive BRGM R&D projects – “Andes
Metallogeny” and “Global Environmental and Metallogenic Syntheses”
(GEMS), the latter being host to this study.

REFERENCES

An, P., Moon, W.M., and Rencz, A., 1991, Application of fuzzy set theory
to integrated mineral exploration: Can. Jour. Explo- ration Geophysics,
v. 27, no. 1, p. 1–11.

Bonham-Carter, G.F., 1994, Geographic information systems for
geoscientists-modelling with GIS: Pergamon, Oxford, 398 p.

Bonham-Carter, G.F., Agterberg, F.P., and Wright, D.F., 1989, Weights of
evidence modelling: a new approach to mapping mineral potential, in
Agterberg F.P., and Bonham-Carter, G.F., eds; Statistical Applications
in Earth Sciences: Geol. Survey Canada Paper 89–9, p. 171–183.

Burrough, P.A., and McDonnell, R.A., 1998, Principles of geo- graphic
information systems (2nd edn.): Oxford Univ. Press, London, 333 p.

Cassard, D., 1999, GIS Andes: a metallogenic GIS of

the Andes Cordillera: 4th Intern. Symp. Andean Geodynamics (G ¨ottingen,
Extended Abstracts): Institut de Recherche pour le D ´eveloppement
Publ., Paris, p. 147–150.

Cassard, D., 2000, GIS ANDES: A metallogenic GIS of the Andes
Cordillera: IGC 31st Intern. Geological Congress, Rio de Janeiro,
Brasil, Abstracts CD.

Cassard, D., Stein, G., Milesi, J.P., and Lips, A.L.W., 2001, GIS
central Europe: the Metallogenic GIS of central and South- Eastern
Europe: EUG XI, Strasbourg, France, Conf. Abst, v. 6, p. 556.

Cibas, T., Fogelman-Souli ´e, F., Gallinari, P., and Raudys, S., 1996,
Variable selection with neural networks: Neurocomputing, v. 12, no. 2,
p. 223–248.

Harris, J.R., Wilkinson, L., Heather, K., Fumerton, S., Bernier, M.A.,
Ayer, J., and Dahn, R., 2001, Application of GIS pro- cessing techniques
for producing mineral prospectivity maps - a case study: mesothermal Au
in the Wayze Greenstone Belt, Ontario, Canada: Natural Resources
Research, v. 10, no. 2, p. 91–124.

Knox-Robinson, C.M., and Wyborn, L.A.I., 1997, Towards a holis- tic
exploration strategy: using geographic information systems as a tool to
enhance exploration: Australian Jour. Earth Sci- ences, v. 44, no. 4,
p. 453–463.

Le Cun, Y., Denker, J.S., and Solla, S.A., 1990, Optimal brain damage,
in Touretzky D.S., ed., Advances in Neural Informa- tion Processing
Systems: Morgan Kaufmann, San Maeo, CA, p. 598–605.

Leistel, J.M., and the MinUrals Team, in press, MINURALS: Min- eral
Resources of the Urals - Origin, Development and Envi- ronmental Impact
(abst.): EUG XI, Nice, France.

Milesi, J.P., Feybesse, J.L., Pinna, P., and Deschamps, Y., 2001,
sustainable

GIS AFRICA: a 1:2,000,000-scale tool

for

development (abst.): EUG XI, Strasbourg, France, Conf. Abst., v. 6,
p. 556.

Raines, G.L., 1999, Evaluation of weights of evidence to predict
epithermal-gold deposits in the Great Basin of the Western United
States: Natural Resources Research, v. 8, no. 4, p. 257– 276.

Reed, R., 1993, Pruning algorithms - a survey: IEEE transactions

on Neural Networks, v. 4, no. 5, p. 740–747.

Remm, J.-F., and Alexandre, F., 2002, Knowledge extraction using
artiﬁcial neural networks: application to radar target identiﬁ- cation:
Signal Processing. v. 82. no. 1. p. 117–120.

Salleb, A., and Vrain, C., 2000, An application of association rules
discovery to geographic information systems: 4th European Conf.
Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (PKDD), Lyon, France,
p. 613–618.

Zadeh, L.A., 1965, Fuzzy sets: Information and Control, v. 8, p. 338–

353. 

APPENDIX

PSEUDO-CODE for the Optimal Brain Damage Algorithm

Training

Pruning

Repeat

Repeat

For each sample x do Present x as a new input of the network Compute the
output values Compute the error For each weight w do

Compute its update value w Compute its new value w+ w

End for

End for

Until the network is trained

For each connection do Compute its saliency

End for Arrange in growing order the connections according to

their saliencies

Prune the ﬁrst connection For each hidden unit do

If the unit is not linked anymore to at least

one output unit

Prune every input connection Remove the unit

End if End for

For each input unit do

If the unit is not linked anymore to at least

one hidden unit Remove the unit

End if End for

Until the stopping criterion is reached (e.g. the error increases
compared with the previous one obtained by the last architecture or the
architecture is smaller enough to extract knowledge)

9


