Knowledge Recovery for Continental-Scale Mineral
Exploration by Neural Networks
Laurent Bougrain, Maria Gonzalez, Vincent Bouchot, Daniel Cassard, Andor

Lips, Frédéric Alexandre, Gilbert Stein

To cite this version:

Laurent Bougrain, Maria Gonzalez, Vincent Bouchot, Daniel Cassard, Andor Lips, et al.. Knowledge
Recovery for Continental-Scale Mineral Exploration by Neural Networks. Natural Resources Research,
2003, 12 (3), pp.173-181. ￿10.1023/A:1025123920475￿. ￿inria-00099699￿

HAL Id: inria-00099699

https://inria.hal.science/inria-00099699

Submitted on 18 Dec 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Knowledge Recovery for Continental-Scale Mineral
Exploration by Neural Networks

Laurent Bougrain,1 Maria Gonzalez,2 Vincent Bouchot,2 Daniel Cassard,2 
Andor L. W. Lips,2 Fr ´ed ´eric Alexandre,1 and Gilbert Stein2

This study is concerned with understanding of the formation of ore deposits (precious and base metals) and contributes to
the exploration and discovery of new occurrences using artiﬁcial neural networks. From the different digital data sets
available in BRGM’s GIS Andes (a comprehensive metallogenic continental-scale Geographic Information System) 25
attributes are identiﬁed as known factors or potential factors controlling the formation of gold deposits in the Andes
Cordillera. Various multilayer perceptrons were applied to discriminate possible ore deposits from barren sites.
Subsequently, because artiﬁcial neural networks can be used to construct a revised model for knowledge extraction, the
optimal brain damage algorithm by LeCun was applied to order the 25 attributes by their relevance to the classiﬁcation.
The approach demonstrates how neural networks can be used efﬁciently in a practical problem of mineral exploration,
where general domain knowledge alone is insufﬁcient to satisfactorily model the potential controls on deposit formation
using the available information in continent-scale information systems.

KEY WORDS: Artiﬁcial neural networks, variable selection, pruning algorithm, geographic information system, metallogenic research.

INTRODUCTION

In the last ﬁve years, continent-scale informa-
tion systems have been constructed by BRGM to
serve metallogenic and environmental research (GIS
Andes, (Cassard, 2000); GIS Africa, (Milesi and
others, 2001); GIS Central Europe, (Cassard and
others, 2001); GIS Urals, Leistel and others, in press).
These information systems are composed of spatially
referenced geographical, geological, and mineral-
deposit thematic layers, and their respective attribute
data (see Fig. 1). They are used primarily to estab-
lish insights in the region’s mineral potential, its past
and future mining activities, and its related environ-
mental vulnerability. The information systems can be

1 LORIA/INRIA Lorraine,

scien-
tiﬁque, BP 239, 54506 Vandœure-l `es-Nancy, France, e-mail:
bougrain@loria.fr.

CORTEX,

Campus

2 BRGM, Mineral Resources Division, BP 6009, 45060 Orl ´eans

cedex02, France; e-mail: v.bouchot@brgm.fr.

exploited further to derive new rules between differ-
ent attributes in relation to mineral deposit formation
and the spatial distributions of the deposits. Differ-
ent methods are applied to deﬁne a region’s mineral
potential, to assign weights to the different attributes,
and to derive new rules. The methods range from data-
driven approaches to knowledge-driven approaches
and also involve hybrid approaches.

MINERAL-POTENTIAL MAPPING

Mineral-potential mapping subdivides areas ac-
cording to metal or mineral favorability (probabil-
ity of deposit) and may be carried out in com-
mercial exploration programs or in governmen-
tal mineral-resource assessments. The ability of a
Geographic Information System to combine spa-
tial data from different sources contributes signiﬁ-
cantly to identifying spatial associations of the data,
and to using models for analysis and prediction of

1

Figure 1. Composite “Metallogenic” layer with its constituent layers: geology (polygons), mines (points), and faults (lines), and related
attributes tables.

the spatial phenomena (Bonham-Carter, Agterberg
and Wright, 1989; Bonham-Carter, 1994; Burrough
and McDonnell, 1998). The dedication of a GIS to
mineral-potential mapping is classically a three-step
approach (Bonham-Carter, 1994; Knox-Robinson
and Wyborn, 1997): (i) data identiﬁcation and orga-
nization, (ii) data quantiﬁcation and processing, and
(iii) data integration and modeling. The evolutions of
Data Mining and Artiﬁcial Neural Networking tech-
niques allow an alternative approach. The latter rep-
resents an adaptive computing system that can learn
from the data in order to conduct speciﬁc tasks. Un-
like the conventional three-step approach, a neural
network can analyze all data simultaneously.

In the past decade, mineral-potential mapping
using a GIS has been applied by various research
groups and involved different ore deposit models.
Models for predicting mineral potential, based on
statistical relationships or on heuristic relationships,
are examples of empirical models in contrast to con-
ceptual models (Knox-Robinson and Wyborn, 1997).
The assignments of weights to the different attributes
can either be carried out using statistical criteria,
or the weights can be estimated on the basis of ex-
pert opinion. The approaches can be subdivided into
data-driven and knowledge-driven models (Bonham-
Carter, 1994; Harris and others, 2001). In data-driven
modeling, the various input maps are combined using

2

methods such as logistic regression, weights of evi-
dence, or neural networks. Data-driven approaches
require that “a prior” knowledge exists in the form of
known mineral deposits or occurrences and barren ar-
eas in the study area. Knowledge-driven approaches,
which rely on the geologist to weight the importance
of different data layers, may include the use of fuzzy
logic, Bayesian probability and Dempster-Shafer be-
lief theory (Bonham-Carter, 1994). Conceptual min-
eral deposit models, containing all typical character-
istics of a certain type of deposit, may contribute in
data selection and data modeling, in helping to decide
which features to enhance and extract as evidence,
and in helping to decide how to weigh the relative
importance of evidence.

The principal advantages of weights of evidence
modeling is that the method is well deﬁned, repro-
ducible, objective (avoids the subjective choice of
weighting factors), and provides a quantitative mea-
sure of conﬁdence (Raines, 1999). Fuzzy sets (Zadeh,
1965) have been introduced to handle with inex-
act concepts in a deﬁnable way (e.g. Burrough and
McDonnell, 1998). Fuzzy set theory has been applied
to mineral exploration (e.g., An, Moon, and Rencz,
1991) demonstrating that the method can represent
adequately and manipulate imprecise and incomplete
information. Data mining is deﬁned as a process of ex-
tracting implicit unknown and potentially useful data
from a GIS (Salleb and Vrain, 2000). Similar to other
statistical approaches, a neural network requires the
construction of a training set that is representative of
both deposits and nondeposits in order to allow dis-
crimination between the two modalities.

NEURAL NETWORKS APPLIED
TO GIS ANDES

GIS Andes, A Continental-Scale GIS

GIS Andes is a homogeneous information sys-
tem of the entire Andes Cordillera, covering an area
of 3.83 million km2 and extending for some 8,500 km
from the Guajira Peninsula (northern Colombia) to
Cape Horn (Tierra del Fuego). Conceived as a tool for
both the mining sector, where it is an aid to minerals
exploration and development, and the academic sec-
tor where it is an aid to developing new metallogenic
models, GIS Andes is based on original syntheses and
compilations (Cassard, 1999).

The following different layers of the system are
available and can be combined in any way that the

user sees ﬁt:

➢ Geographic: a geographic base (DCW
➢ DEM: digital elevation models with a struc-

);

tural analysis of the topography;
Imagery: SPOT 4 VEGETATION

images;

➢ Geological synthesis: geological map of the

Andes at 1:2,000,000 scale;

➢ Geologic map coverage: more than 1,100 geo-

referenced maps;
Seismic: more than 50,000 seismic records, with
modeling of the subduction zone (for example,
Eg. 2);

➢ Volcanic: data on Holocene volcanism;
➢ Gravimetric: the Bouguer anomaly calcula-
tion; isostatic correction and corresponding
residual anomalies; vertical gradient calcula-
tion and structural analysis; gravity modeling
of the Nazca plate;

➢ Heat ﬂow: a base with oceanic and continental

data;

➢ Geochemistry: a database containing 3,935

whole-rock analyses;

➢ Ore deposits:

linked to a Database under
and using a new metallogenic lexicon;
➢ Mineralogy, ﬂuid inclusions, isotopes: data on

Access

the main ore deposits of the Cordillera.

The data used by the artiﬁcial neural networks in

this study were extracted from these data layers.

Attributes and classes

The present study included an analysis of the GIS
Andes data that enabled a speciﬁc model to be com-
piled for recent Andean ore deposits (15 to 2 Ma)
linked to the recent evolution of the subduction zone
(Fig. 2) that underlies the entire cordillera and may be
a continental-scale ore localizing phenomenon. This
speciﬁc model concerns the development of highly
prospected ore deposits (Au, Ag, Cu . . . ) belonging
to epithermal-porphyry systems related to active mar-
gins. The model revealed a set of attributes considered
to have, more or less, a relationship to the spatial
and temporal distribution of the recent epithermal-
porphyry Andean deposits.

The main attributes retained were:

• Type and age of the country rock hosting the

deposits,

• Proximity of the deposit to a regional fault dis-

tinguished by its strike,

3

(cid:210)
➢
(cid:210)
➢
(cid:210)
• Density and focal depth of earthquakes imme-

diately below the deposit,

• Proximity of active volcanoes (indicative of ac-

tive hydrothermal systems),

• Geometry of the subduction zone: depth of
subducted plate below the ore deposit, dip of
the subduction zone immediately below the de-
posit, distance to the subduction trench,

• Position (longitude, latitude, altitude) of the

deposit.

To train the network optimally, two variables
were selected for the study; that is, “deposit” and
“barren”.

Under the “deposit” variable, a total of 398 re-
cent (2 to 15 Ma) Andean Au, Ag, Cu, Mo, Sb, Hg,
Pb, and Zn -bearing deposits (epithermal-porphyry
type), documented as points, were extracted from GIS
Andes.

The “barren” database contains 243 entries. Al-
though the notion of “barren site or nondeposit”
has no geological meaning or signiﬁcance as such,
it is nevertheless of extreme importance to an opti-

mal learning exercise of the network. For a correct
“learning,” the neural network needs to be supplied
with a database of examples that are not deposits and
that, by their opposition or contrast to deposits, en-
able the network to adapt its weight to the task of
discriminating a deposit from a nondeposit. If a de-
posit covers about 1 km2 on average, then any ran-
domly selected 1 km2 cell in the study area has a
high probability of belonging to the barren population
because known deposits represent 398/2.307 million
km2 or about 0.017% of possible cells. The remain-
ing 99.983% of the cells actually represent barren ar-
eas, areas possibly containing “not well deﬁned” (age
and/or type) deposits and occurrences not taken into
account in this study, and a small proportion of undis-
covered deposits. Thus, the method adopted to create
the barren database consisted in selecting arbitrary
points from the areas well outside the mining districts
and where, as far as known, no deposits have been
discovered. Because these points were georeferenced,
their values relative to the retained attributes could
be obtained by crossing the different layers of GIS
Andes.

Figure 2. Seismicity layer of GIS Andes and modeling of subduction zone.

4

In the end, the data set comprises 641 examples
(398 epithermal-porphyry deposits and 243 barren
sites) available for the neural network’s learning
phase.

Classiﬁcation

Artiﬁcial neural networks constitute good tools
for this type of computational modeling. Artiﬁcial
neural networks, such as multilayer perceptrons, can
learn how to classify patterns described by a set of at-
tributes into different classes using a set of examples
as supervised learning. In this situation, the correct
class is given and a function calculates the difference
or error between the desired class and the estimate of
the network. Then a learning algorithm, for example
the back-propagation algorithm, uses this difference
to modify the weights of the network with the aim of
reducing the error. This process continues until all of
the training data have been learned by the network.
A part of the database should be used to learn the
model (learning set) and the other part should be used
to test its performance in a generalization test set (i.e.
how the network classiﬁes patterns it has never seen
during the learning stage). In this way, it is possible to
handle the risk of overtraining of the network. This
phenomenon occurs when the number of weights is
too large compared to the number of learning exam-
ples that allows the network to learn idiosyncrasies of
the examples without learning the general model that
really links the inputs to the outputs. Results obtained
by the network can ﬂuctuate with different selected
learning examples and the size of the leaning set. To
improve the conﬁdence in the results, it is mandatory
to test the performance of the network using different
learning sets. The cross-validation is a special situation
of this procedure. The database is split up into n sub-
sets. Each subset is used as a test set, the other ones
are gathered into the learning set. Finally, the average
of the results is used as a measure of the performance
of the model.

For a n-classiﬁcation task by artiﬁcial neural net-
works, the target class should be coded in a n-binary
output vector with a value of 1 for the class index
and 0 for the others. Using the Gibbs’ activation
function [Eq. (1)], also termed the softmax function,
the outputs of the network predict the a posteriori
probabilities that a pattern (sample) belongs to each
class.

p(kj |x) =

ea j
P j ea j

(1)

where k j is the class identiﬁed by the output neu-
ron j, j ∈ [1, n] and aj is the potential (i.e. the input) of
this neuron.

Various multilayer perceptrons were applied
with 25 input variables, one hidden layer and 2 output
units using a softmax function to predict the a posteri-
ori probability that a new site belongs to the “deposit”
or to the “barren” class.

The ﬁnal objective to be attained was twofold:

(1) Improve and quantify the established
“deposit” model, after ranking the input
attributes on the neural network;

(2) Prepare intermediate-term predictive min-
eral maps once the network had completed
its learning.

Automatic attribute selection

This real-world problem is so complex that, at
the moment, the general domain knowledge does not
allow one to understand fully or predict ore deposit
formation. Good performances obtained by artiﬁcial
neural networks can lead us to extract additional
knowledge which had not yet been incorporated in
existing ore deposit models. With the aim of reducing
the size of the model and extracting knowledge about
which attributes to use, we used a pruning method
(Reed, 1993; Cibas and others, 1996). The operating
procedure of the pruning method is to remove connec-
tions or neurons, or both, which have less inﬂuence on
the system answer. The goals to reach are many. From
a performance point of view, reducing the number of
variables (weights) reduces the chances of overtrain-
ing as generalization performance is improved. The
size of the model is adapted to the complexity of the
task to be modeled. From an implementation point
of view, the smaller the model is, the faster it will
operate. Finally, from a knowledge extraction point
of view, removing connections allows one to extract
rules and removing input units allowing selection of
the most useful attributes. According to the goal and
the method, the removing process can be applied to
a connection, a hidden unit or an input unit. The idea
common to many pruning methods is to build an ap-
proximation of the error surface in the neighborhood
of a local minimum by a Taylor expansion [Eq. (2)] to
study the variation resulting from a removed weight.

± E = X

i

∂ E
∂wi

± wi +

1
2

X
i

X
j

∂ 2 E
∂wi ∂w j

± wi ± w j

+O(k± Wk3)

(2)

5

where E is the error of the neural network, W is
the vector containing the weights and wi is one speciﬁc
weight.

Some assumption are made to simplify the com-
putation. First, the weight variation is ﬁxed to ob-
tain the suppression of the weight inﬂuence, ± wi =
−wi . We assume that after learning we are in a local
minimum, so ∀i∂ E/∂wi = 0. We assume that around
this minimum, the error surface is approximately
quadratic, so O(k± Wk3) are insigniﬁcant terms. In
these conditions, Eq. (3) contains terms with second
order derivatives only, which are, by deﬁnition, the
coefﬁcients of the Hessian matrix H:

± E =

1
2 X

i

X
j

∂ 2 E
∂wi ∂w j

wi w j

(3)

The computational complexity is quadratic ac-
cording to the number of weights. Therefore, a net-
work with one thousand weights needs to compute
one million terms at each iteration.

Le Cun, Denker, and Solla (1990) have suggested
assuming that the Hessian matrix is diagonal to reduce
the number of derivatives to compute. That amounts
to making the assumption that the error variation that
occurs when several connections are removed is equal
to the sum of the error variations resulting from each
being removed. Then:

± E =

1
2 X

i

∂ 2 E
∂wi ∂wi

(wi )2 = X
i

± E(wi )

(4)

To measure the inﬂuence of a weight, they deﬁne

the saliency, si of a connection wi as:

si = ± E(wi ) =

1
2

∂ 2 E
∂w2
i

(wi )2

(5)

This method is a good compromise between sim-

plicity and efﬁciency.

Different strategies exist to decide how many
connections to remove. The best thing to do is to re-
move only one connection at a time and then to retrain
the network before pruning again. But to go faster, we
can decide to remove a small ﬁxed number of connec-
tion or, better, a small percentage of the current num-
ber of connections. In any instant, the computations
are available for a small variation around the actual
location.

6

RESULTS

Discrimination performances

Several multilayer perceptrons were used with
25 inputs, 2 outputs and between 5 and 15 units in the
hidden layer (Fig. 3).

The best performances in generalization for these
different architectures are similar to each other and
can be resumed by the following table (Table 1).

The results we obtain are metal dependant. The
system is able to determine correctly when a site is a
gold deposit in 92%, a silver deposit in 93%, and a
copper deposit in 88 of the situations. When the num-
ber of examples in the database is too small, such as
for antimony, molybdenum or mercury (resp. 31, 25,
and 5 examples), the performances are less effective
because from a statistical point of view the network
discovers it can obtain good performance just by clas-
sifying all unknowns as a “barren site” (e.g. it obtains
only 31/641 = 5% error if it classes all antimony sites as
barren sites). Hence, the global measure of misclas-
siﬁed patterns should be considered to be complete
only with the information given by the confusion ma-
trix, especially when the number of patterns available
for each class is unequal.

Variable selection

The optimal brain damage algorithm was applied
to select the most relevant attributes by reducing by
5% the number of connections after each training
(Fig. 4 illustrates many advantages of this approach).
The approach produced the following ordered

list of relevant attributes:

1. Shortest distance to fault orientations be-

tween N 135◦E and N 157.5◦E;

2. Earthquake density;
3. Longitude;
4. Presence of Cenozoic host rock;
5. Shortest distance to an active volcano;
6. Altitude;
7. Presence of Mesozoic host rock;
8. Shortest distance to fault orientations be-

tween N 0◦E and N 22.5◦E;

9. Shortest distance to fault orientations be-

tween N 112.5◦E and N 135◦E.

This order presents the elements which occur
to be most inﬂuential out of the list of 25 different
items in potentially controlling gold mineralization:

Figure 3. Neural network architecture used to discriminate patterns of two different classes (e.g. mineral deposits and
barren sites or gold deposits and no gold deposits) and described by 25 attributes using supervised learning algorithm such
as back-propagation. Hidden units have hyperbolic tangent function as activation function and output units have Gibbs’
activation function to predict a posteriori probabilities that sample belongs to each class.

(i) variables 2 and 5 could underline the role of un-
steady and long-lived crustal structures, at least since
the Miocene; (ii) variables 3 and 6 probably are linked
to the selection and location of barren sites that are

Table 1. Confusion matrix in generalization obtained by a
multilayer perceptron using all attributes and 10 units on the
hidden layer. In this example, test set contains 47 epithermal-
porphyry deposits and 82 barren sites and it leads to 84%
of correct classiﬁcation.

Known Deposit
Class Barren

Predicted Class

Deposit

Barren

66%
6%

34%
94%

located preferentially outside the mineralized zones
at lower altitudes; (iii) variable 4 indicates that gold
concentrations are controlled by Tertiary magmatism
which represents the preferred but nonexclusive host
rocks of gold mineralization (e.g. variable 7); and
(iv) NW-striking faults (variables 1 and 9) play an im-
portant role as well as approximately N-S (variable 8)
structures.

The absence in this list of the “nature of host
rock” variable (e.g. volcanic lithologies), which ap-
pears at the 15th position (out of 25) illustrates a sur-
prising result. However, despite the fact that some at-
tributes, such as the longitude or the altitude, would
not seem to be relevant, the application shows that
the network can discriminate easily a barren site

7

Figure 4. After pruning, many connections are removed. This reduces complexity model. Hence, it is possible to handle overtraining
problem. Moreover, it is possible to extract knowledge; that is to select most useful attributes, to identify some meaningful combinations,
and to extract rules (Remm and Alexandre, 2002).

from a mineralized one with a success rate of 84%
(from Table 1). Careful selection of barren sites, as
discussed next remains vital to the success of the
network operation and is incorporated in current
research.

CONCLUSIONS

Data mining performances are dependent heav-
ily on the database and the efﬁciency of the applied
data exploration routines. Selection of barren sites

is a key factor in mineral-deposit exploration us-
ing machine-learning techniques. These sites should
nearly resemble the deposit sites, in location and data
description. For example, barren sites can be selected
from deposits that do not contain the speciﬁc metal we
are looking for. Nevertheless, our approach demon-
strates how neural networks can be used efﬁciently
in a practical problem of mineral exploration, where
the general domain knowledge alone is insufﬁcient
to satisfactorily model the possible controls on de-
posit formation using the available information in a
continental-scale information system.

8

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The stylesheet was derived from those pro-
for TALN’97 and
posed by Damien Genthial
Pierre Zweigenbaum for TALN’98. GIS Andes was
developed within the context of
two successive
BRGM R&D projects – “Andes Metallogeny” and
“Global Environmental and Metallogenic Syntheses”
(GEMS), the latter being host to this study.

REFERENCES

An, P., Moon, W.M., and Rencz, A., 1991, Application of fuzzy set
theory to integrated mineral exploration: Can. Jour. Explo-
ration Geophysics, v. 27, no. 1, p. 1–11.

Bonham-Carter, G.F., 1994, Geographic information systems
for geoscientists-modelling with GIS: Pergamon, Oxford,
398 p.

Bonham-Carter, G.F., Agterberg, F.P., and Wright, D.F., 1989,
Weights of evidence modelling: a new approach to mapping
mineral potential, in Agterberg F.P., and Bonham-Carter, G.F.,
eds; Statistical Applications in Earth Sciences: Geol. Survey
Canada Paper 89–9, p. 171–183.

Burrough, P.A., and McDonnell, R.A., 1998, Principles of geo-
graphic information systems (2nd edn.): Oxford Univ. Press,
London, 333 p.

Cassard, D., 1999, GIS Andes: a metallogenic GIS of

the
Andes Cordillera: 4th Intern. Symp. Andean Geodynamics
(G ¨ottingen, Extended Abstracts): Institut de Recherche pour
le D ´eveloppement Publ., Paris, p. 147–150.

Cassard, D., 2000, GIS ANDES: A metallogenic GIS of the Andes
Cordillera: IGC 31st Intern. Geological Congress, Rio de
Janeiro, Brasil, Abstracts CD.

Cassard, D., Stein, G., Milesi, J.P., and Lips, A.L.W., 2001, GIS
central Europe: the Metallogenic GIS of central and South-
Eastern Europe: EUG XI, Strasbourg, France, Conf. Abst,
v. 6, p. 556.

Cibas, T., Fogelman-Souli ´e, F., Gallinari, P., and Raudys, S., 1996,
Variable selection with neural networks: Neurocomputing, v.
12, no. 2, p. 223–248.

Harris, J.R., Wilkinson, L., Heather, K., Fumerton, S., Bernier,
M.A., Ayer, J., and Dahn, R., 2001, Application of GIS pro-
cessing techniques for producing mineral prospectivity maps -
a case study: mesothermal Au in the Wayze Greenstone Belt,
Ontario, Canada: Natural Resources Research, v. 10, no. 2,
p. 91–124.

Knox-Robinson, C.M., and Wyborn, L.A.I., 1997, Towards a holis-
tic exploration strategy: using geographic information systems
as a tool to enhance exploration: Australian Jour. Earth Sci-
ences, v. 44, no. 4, p. 453–463.

Le Cun, Y., Denker, J.S., and Solla, S.A., 1990, Optimal brain
damage, in Touretzky D.S., ed., Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems: Morgan Kaufmann, San Maeo, CA,
p. 598–605.

Leistel, J.M., and the MinUrals Team, in press, MINURALS: Min-
eral Resources of the Urals - Origin, Development and Envi-
ronmental Impact (abst.): EUG XI, Nice, France.

Milesi, J.P., Feybesse, J.L., Pinna, P., and Deschamps, Y., 2001,
sustainable

GIS AFRICA: a 1:2,000,000-scale tool

for

development (abst.): EUG XI, Strasbourg, France, Conf.
Abst., v. 6, p. 556.

Raines, G.L., 1999, Evaluation of weights of evidence to predict
epithermal-gold deposits in the Great Basin of the Western
United States: Natural Resources Research, v. 8, no. 4, p. 257–
276.

Reed, R., 1993, Pruning algorithms - a survey: IEEE transactions

on Neural Networks, v. 4, no. 5, p. 740–747.

Remm, J.-F., and Alexandre, F., 2002, Knowledge extraction using
artiﬁcial neural networks: application to radar target identiﬁ-
cation: Signal Processing. v. 82. no. 1. p. 117–120.

Salleb, A., and Vrain, C., 2000, An application of association rules
discovery to geographic information systems: 4th European
Conf. Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
(PKDD), Lyon, France, p. 613–618.

Zadeh, L.A., 1965, Fuzzy sets: Information and Control, v. 8, p. 338–

353.

APPENDIX

PSEUDO-CODE for the Optimal Brain Damage
Algorithm

Training

Pruning

Repeat

Repeat

For each sample x do
Present x as a new input of the network
Compute the output values
Compute the error
For each weight w do

Compute its update value w
Compute its new value w+ w

End for

End for

Until the network is trained

For each connection do
Compute its saliency

End for
Arrange in growing order the connections according to

their saliencies

Prune the ﬁrst connection
For each hidden unit do

If the unit is not linked anymore to at least

one output unit

Prune every input connection
Remove the unit

End if
End for

For each input unit do

If the unit is not linked anymore to at least

one hidden unit
Remove the unit

End if
End for

Until the stopping criterion is reached (e.g. the error increases
compared with the previous one obtained by the last architecture
or the architecture is smaller enough to extract knowledge)

9

